CoST impact stories as of 31st March 2024 The CoST logframe includes two impact indicators that capture government action in response to issues raised in an assurance report with one focused on specific projects and one on broader reforms. The two indicators were defined using the theory of change that is contained in the business plan with the wording evolving over time. Over the last few years, the International Secretariat has been working with CoST member secretariats to capture these impacts. It is very much work in progress, with ongoing work to verify the examples where possible, but it gives an indication of how the CoST approach to transparency and accountability can be a catalyst to improving specific infrastructure projects and introducing broader sector reforms. There is now a third list at the end of this document that captures examples of improved market competition. And a fourth list will be added soon that captures reforms and mandates that improve transparency (albeit this is an outcome indicator within the logframe).  Total number of action per annum / per member for indicators 1.1 and 1.2 (Updated)2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total Total   No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms No. of projects No. of reforms   Afghanistan   1     6        077Ethiopia          1    21  224Honduras 1 2  3   1        347Malawi  1      1       3 415Sekondi-Takoradi         5 43113   13417Thailand     31            314Uganda   11421544 7 413 3112940Ukraine   1  23 21        639Guatemala                   000Costa Rica                    000Panama                   000West Lombok                    000Jalisco                    000Total                    425193Impact 1.1: Number of projects where actions have been undertaken by the government to improve its delivery based on the findings of an assurance report or issues raised through stakeholder engagementNo.CountryYear action takenInformation sourceAction1. Honduras2016MSG Follow Up meeting with Procuring Entity A section in execution of the Capital Peripheral Ring was under imminent risk of damage to its infrastructure (2015), due to the threat of slippage and insufficient surface drainage.CoST recommended urgently manage the design and construction of complementary risk mitigation works, in order to protect the investment made so far and the integrity of the inhabitants of that area.In mid-year 2016 the MSG met with representatives of the General Directorate of Roads (DGC) to follow up on improvement actions after the first assurance study was launched. The entity's officials informed the MSG that they were in the process of managing the additional resources for the construction of the complementary works and safeguarding people's lives and the investment made. Acted June 2016.2. Honduras2017Interview with the Road Fund for an OCP case study.Honduras’s Road Fund had been troubled by a lack of disclosed information and mismanagement. Only 60% of the required data on infrastructure projects was available on the SISOCS database, with 19% disclosed during the contract management stage and 33% at the contract implementation phase. These concerns were presented to the authorities in May 2016. The MSG recommended that the Sinuapa – Frontera Agua Caliente project be submitted to the superior control entities for analysis and determination of responsibilities, where appropriate, and that the PE officials’ capacities were strengthened to ensure transparency, efficiency and effectiveness. In May 2017, the President of Honduras issued an Executive Order (decree PCM-040-2017) to dismiss the Road Fund’s directors and investigate the potential corruption within the agency. In 2018 a new, transparent body called the Directorate of Road Heritage and Conservation, was created to replace the Road Fund. The infographic can be found here. Acted May 2017. 3. Honduras2017Progress reportA critical road network was designed, planned and a contract was agreed. CoST Honduras, during the 3rd assurance process, analysed this contract and found that the financial plan was based on incorrect data. This data was in the study of road traffic demand, which affected the expected income in some toll booths of the Tourist Corridor. Additionally, there was no evidence to support the decisions made in the contract. When the designers discovered that the financial plan would not be met by the current design of the toll, they installed a toll booth before the works were even begun. For obvious citizens were very unhappy with the booth, refused to pay the toll and burned down two tolls. Because the financial plan was not feasible, the Government was forced to pay a guarantee of 11 million dollars for breach of contract. CoST recommended that the PE should renegotiate the clause of the contract. Subsequently, the relevant authorities developed economic and operational studies for a public-private strategy to guarantee the payment of investments and fulfil all planned works. However, the Government did on act on the recommendation, but they did cancel the contract and pay an additional fine of 100 million USD. This has caused a lot of civil upset and unrest and poor relations with the community. Acted Dec 2017.4. Uganda2017Progress reportThe first Ugandan Assurance Report highlighted a lack of capacity within Wakiso District Council to deliver a road improvement scheme through Rufuka Swamp. The MSG then facilitated a dialogue between the District Council and the Ministry of Works and Transport that led to the Ministry reviewing and approving the road drainage designs that aimed to reduce the risk of flooding during the rainy season.  The District Council also appointed a consultant engineer to manage the project and has since secured permission to use land for the drainage from all home and business owners. 5. Ukraine2017Progress reportCoST Ukraine visited Zhytomyr Oblast, as part of the 2nd assurance report, where they noticed significant defects on the bridge repaired in December 2016. They drew attention to the Ministry of Infrastructure, Ukravtodor and the media that the bridge had only been in operation 3 months before the reinforced slopes of the under-bridge corridor started falling to pieces. The Ministry of Infrastructure contacted the contractor with a request to eliminate those defects and the contractor’s expense, which they then did. 6. Thailand2018Interview for the Thai impact study plus progress reportProject: Flyover construction project at Bor Win Industrial Estate intersection /Eastern Seaboard/Amata City and Pak Ruamjunction, ChonburiDuring Thailand’s second assurance process, issues concerning health and safety in project implementation were identified by the assurance team, including an inadequate number of construction supervisors on site, which was creating a delay to properly identify safety concerns. The lack of adequate communication channels between the contractor and the local communities was also identified during the assurance process as creating an additional level of tension in the project. The issues had first been raised by the local community with CoST Thailand during a public forum session occurred on 27 June 2018, where community leaders were brought together with representatives of the project owner (Department of Highways) and the contractor to express their concerns. Following this engagement, the procuring entity and contractor introduced warning signs and installed barriers on the roads surrounding the communities, as well as signboards to display traffic plans every time a change occurred.The public forum is part of the assurance process carried out by CoST Thailand. It is an innovative feature of the programme developed in Thailand that has been introduced as a suggestion of the local MSG. The public forum has been praised by the assurance team as a key factor to improve project communication and to reduce the level of conflict among stakeholders, with positive impacts in terms of project implementation. In this project, the forum helped to reinstate a health dialogue among the stakeholders and to build trust in the community that their concerns would be heard and timely answered by the procuring entity and the contractor. The project is still ongoing and currently records an acceleration in the projected implementation time-schedule7. Thailand2018Interview for the Thai impact study plus progress reportProject: Reinforced concrete road construction project that connects between Baan Najala Moo 3 Sermsai subdistrict-Baan Laongarm Moo 4 Sermsai subdistrict Amphoe Sermngarm, LampangDuring the assurance process, the assurance team identified an issue regarding the maximum weight the road could carry. Since the road locates in an agricultural area, it needs to bear heavy loads that the reinforced concrete used to build the construction should be capable to sustain. The CoST assurance team raised the issues in a public forum session occurred on 14 August 2018 in the presence of the project owner (Lampang Provincial Administration Organisation), the contractor and local community representatives. Following discussions in the forum, the procuring entity installed a truck scale to measure the weight of vehicles which travel over the road, which was paid for from their own budget. This project is another example of the positive impact of the public sessions in restoring communication among project stakeholders.It is worth mentioning that the public forum sessions conducted by the assurance teams are shared live on CoST Thailand social media (Facebook page) and remain available for public consultation afterwards. So far, the videos posted by CoST Thailand reached 3,907 views since they started to be uploaded on 21 February 2018, creating a new form of social information and engagement with the public.8. Thailand2018 & 2019Interview for the Thai impact study plus progress reportExpansion of Rachapreuk road in NonthaburiThe project concerns the expansion of a local road to reduce the impact of traffic in the suburban areas in the province of Nonthaburi. The project was part of the 2018 and 2019 assurance process. In 2018, community leaders requested the Procuring Entity (Department of Rural Roads) to install a traffic detour sign to facilitate traffic flow. They also demanded (i) the construction of a road overpass to prevent accidents, (ii) the installation of street lighting in the U-turn near the local school, and (iii) the removal of a billboard that was illegally placed in the road. As reported by the assurance team, the Procuring Entity agreed with most of the claims presented by the community. In relation to the traffic detour sign, the Procuring Entity requested that individual submissions were presented by the local administration so that the claim could be replied within the appropriate channels. The installation of street lighting in the school area and elsewhere in the project was consented by the Procuring Entity, which also agreed to immediately remove the illegal billboard. Although the Procuring Entity expressed a willingness to build the road overpass, the construction was conditioned to obtaining approval from landowners.A second public forum session was held in 2019 where additional issues have been raised. This included: (i) the existence of residential areas located lower than the highway height, making them prone to flooding, (ii) the excessive amount of dust coming from the site premises, (iii) the need to reinstall traffic signs that have been removed during the construction works, and (iv) the installation of a bus stop to facilitate the commute of local villagers. According to the assurance team, after the public forum session the Procuring Entity and the contractor agreed to review the drainage network of the project to avoid future flooding in residential areas and to increase the site watering from four to six times a day. The Procuring Entity also agreed to reinstall traffic signs, provided that a formal request was presented by the local administration to the Department of Rural Roads. The installation of a bus stop was considered beyond the scope and jurisdiction of the Procuring Entity. Many of the requests were again related to the improvement in the implementation of the project (dust mitigation and the reinstallation of removed traffic signs for example), but the review of the drainage network and the installation of street lighting will add benefits to the project and to the lives of the local villagers. Although these changes could have been identified during a planning stage, the social accountability carried out ex post through the public forum allowed an appropriate engineering review, with visible gains to the project and to the public.9. Uganda2018Progress reportUganda National Roads Authority was building a New Nile bridge. The bridge did not have embankment material protection to prevent soil erosion and heavy storms. This led to flooding from the river which, at one point, almost washed away the construction work that was in progress. Without embankment protection, there would have been flooding on the road leading onto the bridge. This was unsafe and would slow traffic. CoST recommended that embankment materials protection was maintained to prevent soil erosion and that they implement waste disposal systems. The report also revealed that the New Nile Bridge project had warning signs, site regulations and awareness messages in non-local languages, the beneficiary communities around the Nile speak Lusoga and messages were in English and Japanese. The report recommended a translation of messages into the local or any other languages understandable by users to ensure access to information. Following the assurance report, one PE – Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) established of water embankment protection such as on the New Nile Bridge, wastes were deposited away from the projects. UNRA also disclosed awareness messages in Kiswahili and English and provided additional educative messages as well as enhanced signage on the project. UNRA also put in place officers to disclose information. Acted when – it was reported in Nov 2018?10. Uganda2018Progress reportThe Higher Education, Science and Technology (HEST) are improving and expanding 6 public universities. The second assurance report examined 3 of the 6 universities and identified that the project had quality management issues including low pit roofs/leakages, congested rooms, poor window designs, defects on roof sheds, defects on completed walkways and delays in procurement. CoST recommended that the PE, and donor agency, Enable conduct a detailed quality monitoring of all the completed structures under the project to assess in detail the identified issues.  The PE officials acted by delivering a quality monitoring visit to all the sites to further understand the issues raised in the assurance process for redress. The findings and recommendations from, the assurance report were referred to inform planning for phase two of the HEST project. Acted when – Nov 2018?11. Uganda2018Progress reportThe road works along Nansana Wamala Katooke road had created substantial dust and noise pollution as well as property damage, without citizens being informed. The assurance report recommended that the procuring entity should involve citizens in the road construction through awareness meetings, watering the road to reduce dust and alerting the community regarding the noise pollution. The road works were being delayed as they were being constructed under the Force on Account arrangement therefore, some sections were left incomplete. The report recommended that the district engage the Ministry of Finance or Ministry of Works and Transport to put in place a fund that would work on the road to its completion without delays – this was exacerbated because citizens had offered their land without compensation and these delays were causing concerns amongst the community.  Acted when – Nov 2018?12. Uganda2018Progress report and follow up interviews with officialsNamasuba – Ndejje - Kitiko Road is a major road which connects Makindye-Sagabago with the city of Kampala, and Uganda’s Entebbe Highway. This newly built, tarmac road is the first of its kind many of the residents had seen or used. However, it is also a residential area to many prominent Kampala business men and women, members of civil society and government workers. The streets are lined with schools, business, food vendors, petrol stations and homes. What was the problem?This road was included in the first and second assurance processes in Uganda, in 2017 and 2018 respectively. The assurance team highlighted critical concerns about the road: sections of the project had been abandoned and drainage trenches which had been dug along it were blocking access to homes and shops. Most worrying was the fact that five deaths had been caused by speeding vehicles in the three months since the road had been paved. The community came together at a baraza in December 2017 to raise concerns about Namasuba – Ndejje - Kitiko Road. Residents complained that the road was dangerous and requested speed bumps be built. In an April 2018 survey, one resident complained that the road had been so dangerous that families could no longer allow their children to cross the road to go to school or the shops.Following the baraza, speed bumps were erected in February 2018. What impact has this had?Since the speed bumps were erected there have been zero fatalities on this stretch of the road. Speaking at the launch of CoST Uganda’s third assurance process, Doreen Kyazze Mulema, who is a representative of Uganda’s Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority said:  “I have always been a firm believer in CoST. This used to because I work on these issues and so I understand its value, but now I am also a beneficiary. I am from Makindye-Sagabago, the area around Kitiko Road. I was affected by these deaths. And I was there when they built these safety measures: the speed humps and the access culverts. We were so happy to see them! I cannot wait to go back to my friends, family and neighbours, and tell them that I worked with the people who delivered this.”13. Ukraine2018Progress report and follow-up emailsIn December 2017, the CoST Assurance team visited a construction site in the Kyivska oblast, where they concluded that there were obvious defects in the road construction. This was outside of any assurance report. Once Ukravtodor had completed its infrastructure projects in the area, responsibility for the maintenance of the roads was handed over from national authorities to local authorities. This is often a risk given the large number of small projects delivered (each project was worth around 137,000USD). The CoST Assurance team therefore sent someone to verify the projects where repairs had been carried out. Many defects were identified, and these were reported to Ukravtodor, the national authorities, through an official letter with recommendations of a course of action. These initial letters were ignored and so the report on the visit was published on the CoST Ukraine website, social media and local media contacts. Through public pressure, CoST Ukraine was able to compel Ukravtodor to address the defects on the project at their own cost, as had been outlined in the warranty period in their original contract. 14. Ukraine2018Progress report with email confirming action by UkravotodorThe CoST Assurance team witnessed a road project with obvious defects and reported it to Ukravtodor. It was clear that these initial problems would only worsen during winter and it was necessary to make capital repair immediately, rather than next year when it would be more difficult to address. The report was made first in Dec 2017 via private letter and then in a report that was published on the CoST Ukraine website in February 2018, as well as through social media and local media contacts. Based on this site visit report from CoST Ukraine, Ukravtodor conducted their own inspection of the repair quality of the section of the road N-01 in the Cherkasska oblast. Ukravtodor used this visit to return to the contractor to hold them responsible for the defects. Whilst confirmation has not been received that the project has been repaired, Ukravtodor took responsibility for the quality and maintenance of this project. This has a more wide ranging impact. 15. Uganda2019Progress Report Q4PE enhances stakeholder engagement on Busoga Mwiri Access Road  During the construction of the Busoga Mwiri Access Road by Ministry of Works and Transport, the community members and Local Government leaders in Kakira Town Council expressed concern in the 2nd Assurance process that they had not been involved in the design and implementation of the project. This resulted to the contractor’s lack of quality control, and blocking of access to people’s homes and gardens. There were also no disclosure and the project lacked an information wall and an environmental impact assessment. In addition, there were open manholes, and stormy waters often flooded into people's homes in the second phase of the project. There were at least 5 recorded death/fatalities along the road resulting from lack of speed humps. CoST recommended that the MoWT improves the drainage and installs temporally and permanent speed humps in the long run to deter accidents.1. Key stakeholders that had been left out in the first phase, such as Kakira Town council, UMEME and National Water had been engaged and these in turn addressed the concerns the community raised. In addition, the MoWT had conducted an ESIA and shared findings with the local citizens and had procure an information board for phase one and two as recommended but, this was pending installation. 2. The Ministry improved the drainage system and open manholes to enable movement of rainy water through the main channels. As of 7th December 2020 stormy and run off water no longer flooded to people’s gardens, and homes; some citizens had complained not sleeping whenever it rained during the Baraza of 12th September 2020, as the drainage system had been directed to people’s homes. The MoWT further secured culverts securing at least five homes, and Kakira had been asked to secure culverts for at least 10 homes.3. In response to citizens’ concerns on access to roads, connecting to the main road under construction, the MoWT had graded the Weiraka Modern school road, compacted it with murram. There was an added cost to the project budget which was not disclosed, but, this was justifiable as, the citizens needed it more urgently. The Mwiri Primary school walk ways – access roads were tarmacked as part of the road works on the Busoga Mwiri Access road, this additional cost was also justifiable. 4. There were five accidents reported on the project, 3 of them had happened on 4th December 2020 and these required speed humps to be rectified; the MoWT erected following the Baraza engagement, had installed temporary speed humps and would install permanent humps following the completion of the tarmac rollout. Speed humps help manage drivers speed while on the road. Possible area for the permanent humps included; entrance to Mwiri Primary school, village of hope, river of hope school and old Kakira road. In addition, installation of educative materials around the project and creating awareness with citizens on protection of project signage materials, maintenance of the temporary speed humps was recommended for further action by the MoWT. 5. The MoWT had strengthened supervision of works and had a Site Fore Man full time on the project.In the 2nd Assurance report on Busoga Mwiri Access Road, under MoWT, it was revealed that there was no Environmental Impact assessment done on the project. The lack of this caused challenges in engaging citizens on resettlement along the project, there was no resettlement action plan and citizen engagement on right of way. There were no drainage and waste material disposal and management plan. Even though the ministry noted of having environmental briefs these were not disclosed and not reflected upon during construction by the contractor. CoST recommended that a community assessment and an EIA is conducted by the PE to be sure or predict the impact of the project on the requirements of the community. The report also recommended that the PE works on the relationship with other stakeholders such as UMEME, National Water and Kakira Town Council who would later maintain the road.The MoWT in 2019 used the New Environmental Act 2019 which requires that all projects to have ESEIAs and following CoST recommendations, they conducted an ESIA, findings and recommendations from the project were discussed in the initial meetings with citizens under the second phase of the project. Some of the issues were included in the contract document. Information in the communities was disseminated in February 2020, “we started engagements with the citizens on environmental matters in February 2020 and we talked about issues of dust, breakage of drainage pipes among others. There is also a contact person on site who is responsible for information sharing” said Mutemo Charles, Environmentalist on the Project, MoWT16. Ukraine2019Progress Report Q4During reporting period CoST regional coordinators delivered 8 site-visits in 7 regions. According to the site-visit reports coordinators jointly with local CSOs and activists sent requests to the PE to fix defects on sites. 9 projects were reviewed by PE and defects were fixed by contractors in frame of maintenance or warranty period. PE sent requests to contractors to fix the defects in October 2019, on 9 projects defects were fixed[JH1]. 17. Malawi2020Q2 progress reportIn June 2020 the Government of Malawi increased funding to support the design and construction of radiation treatment and brachytherapy units at a US $10 million cancer hospital. This follows a CoST Malawi assurance report that highlighted that the units had not been built, as the lead consultant selected to develop the design and supervise the construction had allocated insufficient budget and lacked the expertise to design them. The additional budget allocated to this specialist facility will ensure Malawians can receive treatment within their own country and avoids a potential ‘white elephant’ hospital.18. STMA2020Q2 progress reportSTMA’s 1st Assurance Report (2019) highlighted that the needs of beneficiaries were not incorporated into the design of three market projects that were included in the Assurance Process. The PE (STMA) has taken on board the concerns raised in the report and made a conscious effort to engage market traders and customers of the yet to be redeveloped markets. Three engagement meetings (23rd April 2020, 25th May 2020 and 5th June 2020) have been held with these stakeholders to solicit their inputs in the project. These inputs include the provision of bulk-breaking depots, shops and stalls to cater for various goods/products storage facilities, washrooms, fire-fighting equipment, CCTV to enhance security and other ancillary facilities to ensure the market was fit for its intended purpose.19. STMA2020Q3 progress reportThe procuring entity in STMA extended water supply to all three community markets in the District of Diabene after findings from CoST Sekondi-Takoradi’s First Assurance Report revealed there were no toilets or drinking water available.20. STMA2020Q3 progress reportThe procuring entity in STMA extended water supply to all three community markets in the district of Kojokrom, after findings from CoST Sekondi-Takoradi’s First Assurance Report revealed there were no toilets or drinking water available.21. STMA2020Q3 progress reportThe procuring entity in STMA extended water supply to all three community markets in the district of Mpintsin, after findings from CoST Sekondi-Takoradi’s First Assurance Report revealed there were no toilets or drinking water available.22. STMA2020Q3 progress reportSTMA’s 1st assurance report revealed that the library block which was the main component of the Takoradi library complex was not in use.  The budget of the PE for the project appeared to be centred on the cost of the works only, it did not include other cost related factors such as a comprehensive needs assessment, stakeholder engagement, feasibility studies and furnishing and stocking the main component of the project (the library).  The CoST STMA MSG followed up and the PE in collaboration with the Regional Library board has taken steps to make the library functional with the provision of furniture, computers and books. [TCW2][JH3]23. Uganda2020Q3 progress reportAn assurance Baraza builds citizens and stakeholder trust/participation in the upgrade of the Busoga Mwiri Access Road under Ministry of Works and Transport. This led to a number of improvements:1) The MoWT conducted an ESIA and shared its findings with the local citizens2) There were two accidents reported on the project which required speed humps to be installed; the MoWT committed to put these in place, and temporary humps have been installed pending the completion of the road project. 24. Uganda2020Q4 progress reportThe Ministry of Works and Transport fast tracked completion of the Lukaya Market facility as a result of CoST Uganda’s 2018 assurance process with a number of project improvements.1. The contractor who had caused project implementation to stagnate had been terminated, a new contractor (Smadra Technology) was procured, and the project was nearing commissioning. 2. Health and safety facilities were installed, including lavatories for both men and women. 3. The MoWT enhanced supervision and monitoring of the project, this was observed from the records kept by the site manager who had staff from the MoWT visiting the project1. The MoWT made an update of the project design to include additional requirements such as wall curtains, lock up doors and lavatories. 2. Improved the drainage system by constructing additional drainage to prevent flooding. 25. Ukraine2020Q3 2020 progress report & Q1 2021 progress report & Q2 2021A civic monitoring site visit to Kherson oblast resulted in defects being repaired by the regional road service.  In 2018 CoST regional coordinator Volodymir Zhdanov noted erosion along the roadside and slopes of the ground, as well as repair bumpers on M-14 highway in Kherson Region. In 2020 he worked with Road service in Kherson oblast to draw their attention to the erosion and in summer 2020 all defects were fixed following Volodymir’s recommendation. CoST supported local activists and media to fix the defects on the state road M-14 in Kherson. Regional road service in Kherson oblast sent a request to the police to make contractor fix defects of the repairs identified by CoST in 2020. Previous requests were not considered by contractors. The defects were identified by CoST regional coordinator Volodymir Zhdanov. Unclear if this is a new action or related to the above. Action taken October-December 2020.CoST supported local activists and media to fix the defects on the number of roads in Kherson region in May 2021. Regional road service in Kherson oblast send request to contractors and number of defects were fixed. 26. Ukraine2020Q4 progress reportCoST supported local activists in removing garbage from a dump that interfered with road repairs on the Shchyrets-Krasiv C141214 road. As a result, it has been possible to include the stretch of road in the 2021 repair plan. CoST supported communication between local activists and regional authorities, including the prosecutor's office, which helped to solve the problem of a spontaneous landfill. A court decision means the ‘landfill’ was quickly cleared by a local businessman who was the culprit behind the problem. The solution to this situation allows the problematic section of the road to be included in the repair plan for 2021.  27. Uganda2020Q1 2021 progress reportFollowing the publication of an assurance report and a community baraza, the Ministry of Water and Environment extended an irrigation scheme to an additional 12 acres of land covering more farmers. The Ministry handed over the project to the community in December 2020, engaged citizens to strengthen maintenance and ownership, working towards bringing the district leadership of Mbarara to supervise the community and ensure effective management. 28. Uganda2020Q1 2021 progress reportIn the Nyamihanga district, the Ministry received one application from a farmer for extension of water irrigation, working towards strengthening citizen’s ownership and maintenance. And encouraging more people to apply for water, as well as working to have the district own the project. 29. Sekondi-Takoradi2021Q3 progress reportShama District Assembly included guard railings and disability ramps to make the facility disability friendly following evidence from the first assurance report. Action August, 2021https://www.gna.org.gh/1.2120109930. Sekondi-Takoradi2021Q3 progress reportEffia-Kwesimintsim Municipal Assembly corrected misaligned culverts and dredge major drains along the 1.6km road.  Misaligned old and new culvert were corrected to enhance water flow and avert possible ground depression. Dredging along the major drains on the road was also undertaken. This followed evidence presented in the first assurance report.Action in August 2021https://www.gna.org.gh/1.21201099 31. Sekondi-Takoradi2021Q3 progress reportNzema East Municipal Assembly The first assurance report highlighted that the building of a Cassava Processing Factory and incurred a time overrun of 24 months and defective roofing sheet and leaking spots. The defected roofing was fixed in July 2021.https://www.gna.org.gh/1.2120109932. Sekondi-Takoradi2021Q3 progress reportThe first assurance report highlighted that the total floor of the building as designed was different from what had been implemented by the contractor and there was a need to adjust the contract sum to reflect what is delivered by the contractor.  Wassa East District Assembly undertook a change in scope on the OPD block has been corrected to reflect the dimensions in the contract document. Action August, 2021https://www.gna.org.gh/1.21201099 33. Sekondi-Takoradi2022Q2 progress report In February 2021, the 2nd Assurance report revealed that construction works at the Yarbiw CHPs compound located in Wassa East District Assembly were insufficiently designed. The design did not provide ramps to aid the disabled to access elevated floors, rooms within the OPD block. The Assurance report recommended that the entity should ensure the facility was disability friendly. In July 2022, following a monitoring visit by CoST STMA MSG, they observed that the designs were reviewed to provide for ramps across all external and internal access sites, and a disability staircase was constructed in the elevated washroom for persons with disability. 34. STMA2023Q1 progress report   Observed poor site safety management because of lack of hoarding and haphazard arrangement of materials and equipment on construction sites. This exposes the public and workmen to serious injury and accidents. (Tarkwa Nsuame Municipal Assembly – 2nd Assurance Report). As a result, remedial actions (erection of hoarding around construction sites and proper arrangement of materials and equipment) have been undertaken. As a sustainability measure, pre-site handover meetings have also been institutionalized to enable the PE to dialogue with contractors on contract implementation issues.  35. Sekondi Takoradi 2023 TA Visit by OKConstruction of a retaining wall to link culverts at WAMCO-Effiakuma Road. The Assurance report revealed that one of the projects had suffered Visible depression as a result of old and new culvert not linked (Rehabilitation of 1.6 km WAMCO-Effiakuma Road with (3 x 2) m Double Box Culvert 12m long with Drains and Culvert Approach Filling at CDH). On 21st May 2021, CoST STMA recommended that the Effia-Kwesimintsim Municipal Assembly provide a retaining wall to link the old and the new culverts to avert the incidence of depression due to drifting of the sub-base and base materials. On 1st August 2023, the Effia Kwesimintsim leadership constructed a retaining wall to link both culverts. 36. Sekondi Takoradi 2023 TA Visit by OKDesign review to integrate disability friendly services. The Assurance reports revealed that contrary to section 6 of the Persons with Disability Act 2006 (Act 715), some of the projects that had undergone Assurance Processes were not disability friendly (Construction of 1 No. Out-Patient Department (OPD) Block at Atobiase), on 21st May 2021, CoST recommended that the PE (Wassa East District Assembly) should take steps to include disability ramps on an on-going health centre at Atobiase. By August 2023, the Government reviewed the design and constructed a disability ramp to enable access to the health facility for persons with disabilities and sick persons requiring the use of wheelchairs37. Uganda  2023 TA Visit by OKInstallation of a ramp at Elegu border. In January 2022, CoST Uganda recommended to the Ministry of Works and Transport to address gaps in the construction of Elegu border post which had a cost overrun of 25.6%. In addition, ramps and a Cargo shed needed to be constructed. In July 2023, the Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT) fast-tracked the completion of the construction of border posts through the Department of Construction Standards and enhanced Quality Management (CSQM). The Ramps at Elegu were constructed and completed in the first quarter of the Financial Year 2022/23. 38. Ethiopia 2023TA held in October 2023Bule hora University building project: Bule hora university building project was included in the 5th Assurance Report. The report revealed a conflict of interest in contract signing. The president of the university who was also a Member of Parliament had signed a contract on behalf of the university contracting his own firm (name of firm to be identified). This signified a probable conflict of interest. The report further revealed that, project stakeholders were not fully engaged, and they lacked information about the project. The Assurance report recommended to the Ministry of higher education to investigate the procurement process. The ministry of education investigated the project following the findings be shared at an open validation meeting and confirmed there was a conflict of interest, and a lawsuit was instituted against the President and his company. As a result of the investigations, the contract was terminated, and company was suspended. The university president and Member of Parliament lost his parliamentary position. He was imprisoned and his case is waiting court decision. The project construction works were put on hold as government re-organizes procurement of another contractor. (stories from ethiopia are currently politically motivated, we need to go slow on referring to them publicly) 39. Ethiopia 2023TA held Oct 2023Assurance report on Adey Ababa Stadium: The 5th Assurance report included Adey Ababa National Stadium (New) located around Bole area implemented by the Sports Commission of Ethiopia. The project had two phases including the construction and electricity, mechanical connection. A Chinese company – CCCC was contracted to construct/ install materials on the project and did not do their work successfully leaving the installation part not fully done; the company later escalated the price for the second phase including tasks for the first phase – installation that had already been paid for in the first contract. The project budget was worth Birr 4.5Billion. The Chinese firm had asked for Birr 20B and then government offered Birr 13.5B but there was no consensus. The project suffered inflation, time extension, concerns from the communities on the project boundaries and right of way, in addition, the client/government had no capacity to manage and supervise such a complex project at the time; as a result, the project construction works were halted for approximately two years; During a validation and dissemination workshop on the assurance results held in October 2021, CoST Ethiopia recommended the entity addresses the severe time and cost overruns, and that an investigation on the project contracting and delivery processes should be undertaken. However, the entity indicated they did not have capacity to address the recommendation, and the matter would be escalated to higher authorities, parliament and the prime minister’s office. There was also a public outcry and media reports on the projects following the dissemination of the results. Following the discussions, the Auditor General conducted an audit in 2022 a year after the validation and dissemination of the assurance findings in October 2021. The project has been subjected to two assurance processes and the Auditor general used the reports to conduct detailed audits on this project, CoST Ethiopia submitted the reports to the Auditor General, and invited them to attend the dissemination event. The issues on the project were under negotiation with the Chinese embassy and Government, for some time as the Auditor General undertook its investigations.  Following the Auditor General’s report, the contractor has been asked to leave the site, contract terminated, and project to be re-tendered.40. Malawi 2023Malawi Unreported stories identified through review of other project documents; To be validatedGlobal Hope Mobilization (GLOHOMO) a CSO facilitated by CoST Malawi to monitor service delivery on selected infrastructure projects undertook a monitoring visit on the National Aquatic Complex Project in Lilongwe worth MK 7.2 billion; In the first quarter of 2023, GLOHOMO undertook key informant interviews, site visits, and interface meetings with officials to appraise the organization of the project. The Monitoring exercise revealed that there was no information uploaded on the IPPI about the project. The MSG working with the CSO engaged the Ministry of Youth and Sports in Malawi to comply with the disclosure mandate. The entity also revealed that they needed training on how to publish data, CoST Malawi included the officials from the Ministry as part of the trainings on the IPPI, which informed the Ministry’s acceptance to upload data. By December 2023, the entity’s compliance level of disclosure on the IPPI had improved to 72% of the required data. The Monitoring exercise also revealed that project implementation had been delayed by 11 months originally scheduled to be completed in August 2022[JH4]. Project progress was not being reported accurately, which hindered the public's ability to track the project's developments and financial management. Through lobby meetings, the contractor China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation fast[JH5] tracked project implementation and the entity started to update data on the IPPI as per actual progress on site. The project implementation was completed in June 2023.  The CSO also monitored construction of a new road in Lilongwe whose construction works had stalled, the monitoring exercise and lobby meetings influenced the Ministry of Transport to accelerate and fast track implementation of the project.[JH6]41. Malawi 2023Malawi Unreported stories identified through review of other project documents; To be validatedCommunities in Development Activities (COIDA) one of the CSOs trained by CoST Malawi to monitor selected infrastructure projects unidentified gaps on the construction of the Mzimba Stadium in Malawi. Monitoring visits identified that the project had compromised the quality of bleachers at the south of the VIP section[JH7], cracks on terraces, some walls were collapsing. The project also lacked a qualified site engineer on site, which resulted in inefficiencies and delays and cost escalations in construction. Lobby meetings with the Mzimba district council, and the other oversight bodies including the National Construction Industry Council (NCIC) and the Department of Buildings in Malawi who instituted an investigation on the issues identified in the monitoring report. Following the engagements, a site engineer was appointed, and supervision improved, the identified defects were fixed, and the project was due for completion in 2024. Once completed, it is anticipated to boost the sports sector, increase revenue, and revive the sports profile in the district, as well as keep the youth engaged with cocurricular activities.  COIDA’s presence in monitoring the project progress helped keep the contractor MANOBEC Construction Limited in check.42. Malawi 2023Malawi Unreported stories identified through review of other project documents;   To be validated  The Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace (CCJP) Mangochi, a CSO trained by CoST Malawi[JH8], identified a need for community participation and consultation in the construction of a new market in the Mangochi district. After engaging with the Mangochi District Council, the district ensured that the community's concerns were considered in the design and construction of the market. The CSO also monitored construction of a water and sanitation project in Mangochi. The project was hoped to salvage the communities around such as Samama, Ngalamu, and Chapima by increasing access to potable water. Implemented by Blue Water Drilling Limited, the project suffered inefficiencies and lack of citizen engagement. The contractor had not adhered to contract agreements. Following engagements, the district required the contractor to comply with the agreement and instituted community meetings to enable citizens to understand the progress of the project implementation, the citizens were also encouraged to monitor progress of works. On their end, the CCJP Karonga CSO identified several issues with construction of a new community day secondary school in the Karonga district, including inadequate community consultation. The district instituted measures to increase citizen engagement on their projects, and held meetings to hear concerns from the citizens, these engagements helped improve trust between the district and citizens and facilitated a smooth delivery of the project. Citizens were provided with information to facilitate ongoing monitoring as the project implementation processes.   Impact 1.2 Number of reforms that improve a procuring entity’s ability to deliver public infrastructure based on the findings of an assurance report or issues raised through stakeholder engagement[JH9][OK10] No.CountryYear action takenInformation sourceAction1. Malawi2017CoST Int Sec. meeting with the Malawi Roads AuthorityThe 2016 Malawi Assurance Report highlighted the lack of progress on several large road projects due to the poor public financial management of the Malawi Roads Authority. The Malawi Roads Authority responded by breaking up large road projects into smaller contract packages based on the available budget. As a consequence, work on the road schemes could commence and the smaller packages would allow local, small and medium sized contractors to bid for the work. 2. Afghanistan2018Q1 2019 Progress report, Minister of Public Works public statement at an OGP and follow up emails with the National Secretariat and Ministry of Public WorksThe first CoST Afghanistan Assurance Report published in November 2018 had highlighted that poor project preparation was contributing to significant increases in cost and the duration of construction. This finding, alongside other factors, led to the Ministry of Public Works establishing a new Design Review Committee, to tackle the challenges that had been identified as a result of a weak project preparation phase.  The unit reviewed the design of around 100 projects and saved a total amount of $US 8.3 million. Acted Nov 2018. 3. Uganda 2018Progress report The Roads (Amendment) Bill 2017. CoST Uganda Assurance reports recommendations have now been incorporated in the Roads (Amendment) Bill 2017 that has been approved by Cabinet, awaiting ratification by Parliament. The CoST Uganda Champion (and Minister of Works and Transport) raised issues considered in the Bill including; classification of roads, erection of billboards, road safety, storm water drainage and provision, and increased disclosure. Acted March 20184. Honduras2018Progress reportThe 4th Assurance process identified concerns in the projects of the National Port Company (ENP), primarily a lack of environmental study in a project with dirt and drainage works. By May 2018, the National Port Company (ENP) developed an Environmental Management Process that determines the environmental risks according to the type of project. Acted May 20185. Honduras2018Progress reportA major road project from Tegucigalpa to the south was involved in the 4th Assurance process. The assurance identified concerns in the projects of Strategic Investment Honduras (INVEST) primarily (i) lack of security measures for users and (ii) waiting times for passers-by exceeded the recorded average. INVEST-H reacted by: (i) monitoring compliance with security measures and development of specific plans for heavy traffic periods. Posters and brochures were designed with security measures for workers and users and (ii) developing a Traffic Management Plan as a mitigation strategy for the impacts generated by the project and to reduce the impact on road users. Acted Jan 20186. Honduras2018Progress reportA road project, Villa de San Antonio – Goascorán, Section I, Sub-section I-B, was seriously affected by the lack of approval of external financing. The project implementation was delayed because of the lack of money. To avoid this problem in future projects, the assurance team recommended establishing prioritization policies when defining budgetary allocations, ensuring that large-scale projects are not delayed because they do not have financial backing. The PE did not implement this on the Villa de San Antonio – Goascoran road but followed the recommendation and applied it to the project Construction, Rehabilitation and Improvement of the CA-5 South highway, Tegucigalpa - Jícaro Galán, Section: Jícaro Galán - La Venta del Sur. The project was finished before the set date and without delays. The PE has committed to implement the recommendation on all future projects. Acted when May 20187. Thailand2018Interview for the Thai impact studyImproving construction site communicationA community leader informed the researcher that a common practice of Procuring Entities and contractors not to communicate with local villagers. In his words, it would happen “to wake up with a construction hole in front on their homes”. The public sessions led by CoST assurance team started to change this behaviour. In interviews, the assurance team referred to as a learning process where Procuring Entities and contractors are being educated about the importance of keeping a constant communication channel with local communities.Change includes replacing the old mentality that boards put outside the worksite, with generic and sometimes confusing information of the project, would suffice to communicate with the public. The adoption of clear messages, in plain language, with information that is relevant for the communities, and which can be understood by them was referred as one of the key lessons learned by Procuring Entities and contractors. The change also refers to the adoption of an ongoing process of updating the communities of the works carried out on site, particularly if they can adversely impact the routine of the local villagers. Public announcement on traffic deviation is a new tool implemented in many projects assessed by CoST assurance team. 8. Uganda2018Progress reportOf the 4 projects studied in the 2nd Assurance project in Wakiso District, none had a risk management plan. The assurance report team raised this with the district, as a sector wide issue for all projects in the district. The district was asked to put in place risk management plans as these would identify the risks associated to the projects and propose mitigation measures. Acted when – June 2018?9. Uganda2018Progress report and interviews with officialsWhat was the problem?A rapidly urbanising area produces more infrastructure problems than just those affecting road maintenance. In the incredibly populas municipality of Makindye Sabagabo, a lack of sanitation and waste management led to several public health issues, with many people simply dumping waste throughout the streets.  Wild dogs were attracted to the food waste which led to injuries – and deaths – from dog bites. There were also cholera risks, and suspected outbreaks, when local flooding combined with garbage left out on the street. In addition, with no sewer line in the municipality underground water sources became contaminated by traditional pit latrines. Contamination meant local sources had to be abandoned and the community is now reliant on the more expensive national water supply. These problems were highlighted in CoST Uganda’s second assurance process and raised in meetings with both district and municipal councils. They were formally submitted to the municipal council by CoST Uganda in the 2019 CoST assurance findings, and a baraza was held to address the issues later that year. .   What impact has this had?The municipality has now started to address the critical problem of waste disposal. On CoST Uganda’s recommendation,it has created a bylaw legislating how waste management systems need to function – namely, that citizens cannot simply dump waste they create. It has started to work alongside private waste disposal companies and has begun preparations for a municipal waste disposal system. Crucially, it has started to work with communities to improve waste and sanitation practices which will mean that change occurs from the bottom - up. Since the baraza, Makindye-Sagabago has been holding monthly community clean ups which have been driven by the community itself. The role of CoST has been to support, advise and lead the way in public participation in the development of this aspect of infrastructure development.  As Kato the town clerk says: ‘’CoST had a really positive impact on the community involvement in this issue. In terms of planning and evaluating projects we now know to involve communities and update them on progress as much as possible. People have committed to giving parts of their (already small) plots to widen roads so garbage trucks can access them.’’  10. Ukraine2018Progress reportThe Minister of Infrastructure included CoST recommendations from the 2nd assurance report in the redrafting of the Road Development State Program for 2018-2022. As per recommendations from CoST, the Ministry included the implementation of an independent engineering supervision body and separated this function from the PE, Ukravtodor. The Ministry also instructed Ukravtodor to purchase all engineering services as open tenders. Whilst no tangible impact on the delivery of public infrastructure has yet been seen, it is still early in the implementation stage and there are hopes that impact will be seen in 2019-2020.  Published in March 201811. Ukraine2018Progress reportUkravtodor asked it territorial representative offices to admit bidding only to those participants who have an experience of performing work in Ukraine or the EU countries for at least 5 years. This violates WTO rules and international agreements on public procurement. In February 2019, CoST Ukraine recommended that this was revoked in an official letter to the Ministry of Infrastructure and Ukravtodor cancelled its discriminatory recommendation. Acted Jan- March 201812. Uganda2019Q1 & Q2 & Q 3 progress reports and OK SpreadsheetCoST Uganda conducted training of 8 District Local Governments on how to use the Infrastructure Monitoring Tool to enable performance of infrastructure projects within the Local Governments. The trainings were held using the Multi-Stakeholder working arrangement whereby, the Lower level oversight bodies were brought together in each of the districts under their platform the District Integrity Promotion Forums (DIPFs). These platforms were established and monitored by the Directorate for Ethics and Integrity (DEI) under the Office of the President and their core role is to provide oversight on Government programmes within the lower levels. These forums were trained on how to monitor infrastructure projects and engage on issues, they have the mandate of taking action on findings.One of the key issues that came out from the trainings was the lack of sufficient funding for oversight within the Local Governments. CoST recommended to DEI to provide incentives such as strengthening financing to Local Governments to facilitate the DIFPs in effecting their oversight role on infrastructure projects. CoST also recommended that Local Governments should pull together departmental budgets to facilitate joint monitoring since it yielded more results compared to selected monitoring visits.Following the trainings the Directorate for Ethics and Integrity engaged Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide guidance on financing for Local Governments to facilitate these platforms effectively deliver their mandate. DEI communicated during the follow up training sessions of the Local Governments that  Ministry of Finance had issued a directive that all Local Governments should henceforth provide budgets under their annual budgets for monitoring and supervision, these budgets would also support facilitation for the DIPFs. 13. Uganda2019 Resulting from the above training, districts including Mbale, and Kabaale have improved project supervision in a variety of Schools and Water projects. For example Mbale district has used the Monitoring Tool and resources in the renovation of Bumuluya P/S, Nakaloke P/S classroom blocks which were well supervised enabling timely completion of the projects.  In addition, site meetings are now held on a monthly basis. A good example is the seed secondary school at Bubentsye that was supervised every month and completed on time. Site meetings have been used to educate the community members on the contents of BOQs and their technical interpretation. Monitoring in Masindi has been institutionalised and has resulted into recovery of misappropriated funds. More districts have approached CoST seeking training including Masindi, Kasese, Soroti and Mawokota.Improvement of project supervision, recovery of misappropriated funds in Masindi district, increased project performance due to increased financing for infrastructure community monitoring platforms.14. Uganda2019Progress Report Q2Introduction of garbage management mechanisms within Makindye Sabagabo The 2nd Assurance Report revealed a lack of a risk management plan, noise pollution, property damage, Environmental and Garbage Management plan and a decommissioning plan on the St. Noah Nfuufu road, Municipal Road and along the Namasuba Ndejje Kitiko road. These issues were unhealthy for citizens as the scattered garbage was causing a health hazard. The report recommended to Makindye Sabagabo Minucipal council to; Consider inclusion of the project design life, risk management plans, noise and property damage control measures and environmental decomposition plans; and put in place measures to enhance garbage disposal and maintenance of access roads.1. 4th January 2019Details any action taken by the government, including dates, measures etc. - The Municipal developed an ordinance on Garbage Management for the long term which would provide for procurement of firms to manage garbage; - The Municipal constituted an arrangement to have private companies manage the garbage as the ordinance comes to action. 15. Uganda2019Progress report Q2The above Municipality has also made it mandatory that all projects under procurement should have Environmental Impact Assessments and Risk Management plans.16. Uganda2019Poor performance of infrastructure project contracts and governance structures within Local Governments; was among the major concerns raised during CoST Uganda disclosure and capacity building sessions with 8 Local Governments of Kabaale, Masindi, Ntungamo, Mbarara, Mbale, Gulu, Arua and Wakiso. This was majorly attributed to the lack of tools, finances for monitoring and capacity to monitor projects during execution. CoST Uganda developed an Infrastructure Monitoring Tool https://www.cost.or.ug/download/cost-uganda-infrastructure-monitoring-tool-imt/ which was introduced to Government, Private Sector and Civil Society representatives at district level who were organized through the District Integrity Promotional Forums coordinated by the Directorate for Ethics and Integrity. The trainings also revealed that citizens needed more involvement in the delivery of public infrastructure. The findings and recommendations were compiled into reports and submitted to all the seven districts as well as DEI.  All the 8 districts adopted the IMT as their standard monitoring tool and have reported that it has been helpful in gathering evidence to address structural changes and identify risks of corruption. In Kabaale and Gulu two projects monitored revealed delays in implementation, lack of citizen participation and suspected mismanagement of funds, the issues were reported to the line authorise of Government for further scrutiny. Some of the districts such as Kabale customized the tool across their existing tools. "When we implemented what is in the IMT, we gained the public's trust which led to better revenue collections which enabled us buy a grader and tarmac more roads in Wakiso" Eng Sam Mwesigwa, District Engineer, Wakiso DLG.17. Afghanistan2020Q1 progress reportCoST Afghanistan’s 2nd assurance report recommended that the NPA should establish an E-tendering process. As a result, the NPA launched an e-tendering process for services, good and works in July.  18. Afghanistan2020Q3 progress reportAfter major problems were highlighted in the project preparation stage in CoST Afghanistan’s 2019 assurance report - leading to time and cost overruns on almost all projects - the Afghanistan National Water Affairs Regulatory Authority (NWARA) introduced a ‘backup unit’ of engineers to oversee project quality and design. Since being established in early 2020, the unit has surveyed 302 projects and overseen the design of 215, reducing the risks of delays and cost overruns in the long-term and laying the foundations for a more efficient water sector.19. Afghanistan2020Q3 progress reportCoST Afghanistan’s 2nd assurance report showed projects in the water sector suffered from a 64% time overrun, due in part to errors in Bills of Quantities. As a result of recommendations from CoST Afghanistan’s 2nd assurance report, NWARA created a standardised template for Bills of Quantity to minimise mistakes.20. Afghanistan2020Q3 progress reportOn CoST Afghanistan’s 2nd assurance report recommendation, the National Water Affairs Regulation Authority developed a survey manual and procured up to date instruments for the accurate survey of infrastructure projects, such as total stations. 21. Afghanistan2020Q3 progress reportAs a result of CoST Afghanistan’s 2nd assurance report, the Kabul Municipality established the Directorate of Projects and Programmes Planning to improve supervision of infrastructure projects and improve quality in project construction. The CoST team is in contact with Kabul Municipality to set proper indicators for progress measurement.22. Afghanistan2020Q3 progress reportAs a result of CoST Afghanistan’s 2nd assurance report, the National Water Affairs Regulation Authority has prepared a manual for project supervisions and implementation in order to improve quality in project construction23. Uganda2020Uganda Actions and Reforms spreadsheet (emailed by OK)As a result of 3rd Assurance Report recommendations, the Ministry of Education and Sport passed a directive that all initial project activities should be completed before project sites are handed over to delivery entity (e.g. the construction firm)24. Uganda2020Q2 progress reportAs a result of the BII and CoST Uganda recommendations, the PPDA developed a paper on data management that includes options for an institutional policy for management of procurement data across all entities.  25. Uganda2020Q2 progress reportAs a result of the BII and CoST Uganda recommendations, the PPDA reviewed and translated reservation scheme guidelines. 26. Uganda2020Q1 2021 progress reportThe Ministry of Water’s Western region office is developing a data base to strengthen documentation and archiving. And has planned a learning event, strengthen the capacity of the communications officer to publish project information. It has also held one project management training, increased frequency of project meetings with project teams and communities and initiated regional peer learning online sessions. Invited CoST to attend and share experiences in these meetings. And is involving the media in all project activities to enhance access to information, increase awareness and share experiences.27. Honduras2020Evelyn learnt of this verbally then captured in learning paper A new unit was established by the Honduras Ministry of Finance to deliver second generation PPPs based on the evidence and lessons highlighted in the 6th CoST Honduras assurance reports. The scrutiny applied contributed to the closure of Coalianza at a time when evidence of its poor governance, such as staff being hired on suspicious grounds, was increasingly coming to light. In addition, in 2020 a new specialised PPP unit was also set up to improve PPP management. The unit is primarily purposed with assessing how suitable projects are to use the PPP modality so wise decisions can be taken by the government from the outset. More is in the learning paper.https://infrastructuretransparency.org/news/lessons-shared-from-heightening-ppp-transparency-in-honduras/28. Ethiopia 2020Initially reported Q4 2019 but counts in 2020 when legislation was passed as reported in progress report Q2 2020  CoST Ethiopia has been emphasising macro level regulatory interventions, instead of individual projects. The General Recommendation included that Government should commence projects with full preparation such as prefeasibility, feasibility, adequate preparations, and continuous monitoring and evaluation of projects.  Government through the Planning and Development Commission drafted a proclamation to address the issue of projects commencing without feasibility studies, and full planning, monitoring and evaluation plans.  The proclamation has been endorsed by the counsel of ministers and has been submitted to the House for endorsement.  This Proclamation is expected to make a very big difference in relation to project appraisal and subsequent management (prefeasibility, feasibility, review by independent body, progress review, evaluations.  The Project Administration and Management Proclamation was published in the gazette in early 2020. According to Tesfaye, the proclamation relates to the following: ’Projects are classified as Large, Medium and Small. All projects shall be subject to: Preliminary Selection (or screening); Pre-feasibility and Feasibility; and Appraisal. Projects which passed these stages will again be filtered by Prioritization.’’  29. Ukraine 20202019 Progress Report Q4 2020 progress report Q1  Procurement Manual for the Road sector CoST Ukraine developed Manual on road procurement monitoring that included several recommendations for Government and PEs on the procurement process. The recommendations were adopted by Ukravtodor in October 2019 as part of the Methodological recommendations for procurement in the road sector. The final draft of official recommendation is expected to be approved in February-march 2020. https://costukraine.org/projects/posibnyk-ryzykiv-zakupivel-v-dorozhnij-sferi/ Q1 2020 report: CoST provided comments on the methodological recommendations for procurement in the road sector developed by Ukravtodor and provided them to the relevant working group of the Ministry of Economy. Over 50% of the remarks were approved. According to Slava:   ‘’ The document is something to be improved but this is a compromise between business/government and civil society and experts’’ https://zakon.rada.gov.ua/rada/show/v1572915-20#Text  30. Uganda2021Jan – March 2021 progress reportFollowing a series of engagements by various stakeholders, UNRA has made special steps towards increasing the level of participation of local firms in the roads sub-sector. The procurements of contracts have been packaged so as to “ring – fence” them for local content: Mechanised maintenance of unpaved and paved roads; Periodic maintenance of paved and unpaved national roads; Low Volume Sealed Roads (LVSR); Swamp improvements; Selected bridge works (short span bridges and multiple box culverts); Labour based maintenance of national roads.31. Uganda 2021Q3 progress reportPPDA revised guidelines for local governments for direct procurements to incorporate environmental, social, Health and Safety requirements for the procurement of works, requirement of contract prices in Uganda shillings, clarification on the instruction for submission of joint ventures/Consortium and Associations and editorial enhancements. And provision for participation/consultations between central and Local Governments on centrally procured infrastructure projects.32. Uganda 2021Q3 progress reportPPDA developed guidelines for emergency procurements, integrating transparency and accountability specifically, requiring entities to disclose available budgets and sources of funds offline and online, undertake market surveys to address concerns of inflated quotes for projects, Disclosure of guidelines and recommended methods of procurement and requests for bids using all major platforms, social and physical. 33. Sekondi-Takoradi20213rd quarter progress reportFollowing a recommendation from the first assurance report, Mpohor District Assembly changed their design standards for basic school infrastructure to include sanitary facilities for users and changing rooms for female students to prevent truancy during menstrual cycle. https://www.gna.org.gh/1.21201099August 202134. Sekondi-Takoradi20213rd quarter progress reportFollowing a evidence from the first assurance report that highlighted limited capacity to ascertain quality of work done and improper project site management, Tarkwa Nsuaem Municipal Assembly entered a partnership with the University of Mines and Technology to allow access to the university’s laboratory to conduct quality tests on construction materials. August, 2021 - https://www.gna.org.gh/1.2120109935. Sekondi-Takoradi20213rd quarter progress reportIt also instituted an Internal policy to organize pre-site meetings with all contractors before site handover to ensure proper housekeeping to promote safety on construction sites.36. Uganda2021Q3 progress report 2021KCCA has implemented in-house trainings for staff on compliance with procurement guidelines and quality control and also prior review of bidding documents and evaluation reports to ensure quality control of these documents. The Head Procuring and Disclosing Unit also strengthened reviews on each and every bidding document and Evaluation report before they are submitted to the Contracts Committee.  As part of the pilot entities on the e-GP, the Authority is uploading all required data on the portal. This is to compliment the manual and automatic procurement tracker for data retrieval and archiving. KCCA further instituted a Contract Management system to serve a similar purpose. These measures were taken following an assurance report recommending that KCCA strengthens compliance with procurement guidelines, institute quality controls in the preparation of bidding documents and evaluation reports to address inconsistencies. 37. Uganda2021Q3 progress reportPPDA has designed a tool known as SPSS and it was being relayed to all levels to raise awareness of ESHS. This follows the 4th assurance report highlighting limited compliance with ESHS provisions. For example, under the (KCCA) KIIDP 2 Batch 2A Lot 1 Project, some of the toilets were not operational and had caused potential health hazards to the project staff.38. Uganda2021Q4 progress reportIt is understood that a dedicated unit in each PE as a depository of Project Information has been established based per PPDA Act, s.31(o). Accordingly, PDU is a depository of Project Information in an entity. It was noted on 1st October 2021, in the updated scoping study report Please upload evidence – resolutions, publications etc.- onto the drivehttps://www.cost.or.ug/download/reimagining-infrastructure-transparency-in-uganda_updated-country-scoping-study-report/39. Uganda 2021 4th quarter progress report  & Jan – March 2021 progress reportMinistry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (where PPDA falls) revised the reservation and preference schemes turning them into guidelines. The Ministry also developed e-GP regulations, negotiation regulations and procurement and disposal planning regulations. In the development of these guidelines, CoST Uganda was involved, it is important to note, the lead private sector associations played a critical role in the reservation and preference schemes regulations. Progressively, we note, these associations have become more vocal in influencing change following the CoST Uganda Private sector study report https://www.cost.or.ug/download/research-factors-affecting-private-sector-participation-in-public-infrastructure-procurement-in-uganda_full-report/  November/December 2021   Following a learning and reflection meeting conducted on 13th August 2020, stakeholders expressed concern that Local Government had been left out in the advocacy for fair business practices; yet, these take a large share of investments and budget in public infrastructure procurement. Following these discussions, the PPDA revised the standard bidding document as a guideline for procurement of works under the Open Bidding for Local Governments on 15th September 2020.  “The revision incorporates environmental, social, health and safety requirements for the procurement of works; required contract prices be shown in Uganda shillings; requires clarification on the instruction for submission of joint ventures/Consortium and Associations and editorial enhancements. Bidders are required to include in their bids the details of their compliance with Environmental, Social and Safety requirements and to adhere to them once the award is made to the provider throughout the execution of the contract.’’  40. Uganda20221st quarter progress reportSince 2016, following the publication of the scoping study, and 4 assurance reports, CoST Uganda has been advocating for an increase disclosure using international open data standards such as the OC4IDS/IDS, set up a disclosure framework to increase transparency. These discussions were further enhanced by the business integrity initiative action, calling for increased disclosure. In April 2021, Government agreed to align the procurement portal (GPP) to the CoST standard. CoST provided the technical and financial support to undertake this task, by February 2022, the Government Procurement Portal (GPP) was aligned to the OC4IDS, and Government issued a statement compelling entities to publish data. Over 100 public officials have been trained to use the portal to disclose data, by June 2022, in the second reporting report, a total of 77 projects had been disclosed by entities. Although, the disclosure process has been hampered by the introduction of a new portal the e-GP which will now require focus to integrate the CoST standard, entities continue to publish data through the GPP. 41. Uganda20222nd quarter progress reportUNRA instituted grievance management committees on all road projects to address citizens’ concerns. The 2021 ITI report recommended that; UNRA considers operationalizing Baraza approach across all infrastructure projects, strengthen internal data management and archiving systems; UNRA responded in June indicating that; UNRA instituted Grievance Management Committees on all road projects and Corporate Grievance Management system to collect, document, resolve and provide feedback concerning complaints from the public that are a result of UNRA’s operations. Joined various Road Committees that have been in every sub county to enhance engagement and accountability to the public on infrastructure projects, UNRA is also engaging the public through other foras such as various mainstream and social media platforms as well as one on one engagements with media and client care teams. In a bid to strengthen disclosure, UNRA started utilizing the Government Procurement Portal (GPP) as a tool for monitoring, informing, analyzing data and reporting on performance of procurements, UNRA is also providing a quarterly status update of performance of road projects under the Authority’s portfolio on its website.42. Uganda20222nd quarter progress reportKCCA adopted information management systems to strengthen documentation; the ITI report recommended that KCCA strengthens internal data management and archiving, strengthen disclosure across all platforms, sustain citizen engagement through Barazas. In response, in June 2022, KCCA indicated that they had; adopted Donor systems such as the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system as repository for Project information, embraced decoding of issues from citizens reported via online platforms, and sharing across departments to enhance feedback and decision making. And staff were booked Airtime with leading media houses to discuss the ongoing and upcoming infrastructure project in the city. And have introduced their staff to professional trainings with the latest capacity building done by FIDIC.43. Uganda 2022Q3 progress report Issue: In the Uganda 5th Assurance report, a total of Ugx 2,571,393,446 was reported as cost overruns for the East African Public Networking Laboratory project. Cost variations were attributed to changes in specifications and design changes. The assurance report recommended that the ministry improves project planning and initiation processes such as feasibility studies to inform effective designs and budgeting. Action: MoH strengthened their internal systems providing an internal requirement that projects should be designed timely to avoid multiple cost overruns in re-design, late design, and scope changes during implementation. This as indicated by the Ministry’s staff commenced recently from the experience, they noted on the East African Public Networking Laboratory projects where they spent lots of money owing to re-design. This action was identified during a follow up engagement with the Ministry staff, via the phone.44. STMA2022Q4 progress report Stakeholder consultations in the design stage of projects has been enhanced; Sekondi-Takoradi Metropolitan Assembly (STMA) and Tarkwa-Nsuaem Municipal Assembly (TNMA) conducted extensive engagements before the construction of local socio-economic infrastructure. Wassa East District Assembly (WEDA) made provision for elevated staircases and disability ramps to enable access by persons with disability to a health facility that was chosen for the 2nd Assurance Report.45. Ethiopia 2023 TA Visit held in October  FEACC uses CoST reports for reference and laying a foundation for their corruption risks surveys and audits (CoST Ethiopia asked to track this and identify which issues have been recommended and FEACC has undertaken detailed investigations on).   * In all sectors, FEACC conducts corruption risk assessments and makes recommendations, these reports go directly to the ministers to act. And have published 25 sector reports. FEACC uses the CoST reports and integrates them into the risk assessment, so the report section on infrastructure usually includes information from the CoST reports.  * FEACC is developing a sectoral anticorruption policy. CoST assurance reports provided a baseline for the policy. * CoST IDS was used to collect data in the study on corruption risk and procurement assessment by FEACC.46. Uganda 2023Q3 progress report Construction sector management. From the private sector study conducted in 2020 and the 4th Assurance report, CoST Uganda recommended that the MoWT should fast-track the development and review of the construction sector classifications, handbooks, and policies such as the National Construction Industry Policy, providing for the establishment of the Uganda Construction Industry Commission (UCICO).In August 2023, following the rationalization of agencies and expenditure programme, the Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT) renamed Construction Standards and Quality Management (CSQM) as Construction Industry Development and Regulation (CIDR). The Construction Industry Bill has been drafted for enactment into law to allow its execution instead of the establishment of UCICO. 47. Uganda 2023Q3 progress report The handbook for classifying consultants and contractors is now available being operationalized by the National Building Review Board NBRB) to regulate construction and buildings in Uganda. This will help abate recent incidences of falling buildings during and after construction. 48. Uganda 2023Q3 progress report To further enhance sector performance and value for money, the government in July 2023 set tough rules for Districts and finally set service standards. Under the Works and Transport sector (Daily Monitor 17/7/2023), the cost of road Construction was set as follows. Ugx 80-100 million for 1 kilometer of class ‘A’ unpaved (gravel) and Ugx 15-20 million per kilometer for maintenance. Ugx 53.6 – 67 million for construction of Class C unpaved (gravel) road per kilometer. Ugx 10.05-13.4 million for maintenance of the same road under (II) above. 49. Uganda  2023 Q3 progress report  Construction of a central materials testing laboratory in central region. To enhance quality management systems, the Ministry of Works and Transport is constructing a regional laboratory for testing construction materials in the Kireka site. This laboratory will serve the central region and help abate use of poor-quality materials that lead to delivery of shoddy work/substandard work.    50. Uganda 2024OK identified at the ITI event (April 2024)The City Authority in Uganda (KCCA) used the 1st ITI findings included improving the safety of roads by  installing alerts, and information walls across their road sector projects, specifically in one division of Nakawa (Bugolobi area) used to have open manholes that flooded each time it rained. A few accidents had been reported to the City Authority and these were among the concerns from the ITI that encouraged the Authority to provide adequate information to the city dwellers. This prompted them to install warning signs in the risky areas, alerting users where open manholes are located. This helped them avoid drowning in stormy waters each time it rained. The process to install warning alerts is ongoing across the five divisions of Kampala.   51. Uganda 2024Q1 Follow up engagements with the programme by OKGovernment amended the Uganda public Procurement and Disposal Authority Act, 2021, whose regulations were approved in March 2024, providing a review on the percentage of value of local content participation increasing it from 24% to 32.8% by 2023, reducing cost of bid securities to 1% from 2% and performance securities to 5% from 10%.52. Uganda 2024 Q1 follow up engagements with the programme by OKReservations for special interest groups to participate in public infrastructure procurement, each entity is required to reserve at least 15% of its procurement spend for goods, works and services for women, youth and persons with disabilities owned enterprises within its geographical area. For construction, services include, road infrastructure maintenance, supply of construction materials, consultancy services, bush clearing of feeder roads among others.   Impact 1.3 Number of examples of improving the business environment No.CountryYear action takenInformation sourceAction1. Afghanistan2020Q3 progress reportAs a result of CoST Afghanistan’s 2nd assurance report recommendation, there has been an increase in the number of bid announcements on different government and non-government websites (such as AGEOPS), the print media and social media such as Facebook, in order to increase competition2. Uganda2019 - 2020Jan – March 2021 progress reportThe multi-stakeholder approach adopted by CoST Uganda has allowed it to become a trusted partner for both Government and the business sector. It was noted that businesses through their line associations of UNABCEC and UACE have been empowered to demand for integrity and fair business practices. Over 220 businesses have engaged in fair business practices. CoST Uganda recorded a baseline of 1.6 bids per tender in 2019, we have recorded tremendous improvements in competition observed through the trends in the number of bids per tender rising to 12.5 in 2020.3. Ukraine2018Note from Natalie Forysuk May 2022Case Study: Rooting out corruption, promoting competitive tenderingIn 2017, regional road sector agencies were routinely avoiding open bidding procedures by signing direct contracts with newly established companies. The companies could not provide evidence of similar project experience or ownership of the necessary equipment as required by the tender. In 2018, CoST Ukraine published an example of this from the Ternopilska regional agency, where a 1.64 km road section was divided into 41 sections, each 40-60 meters long, with the same number of signed contracts. The company was affiliated to the head of the regional road agency. This example was discussed by the Cabinet leading to a criminal investigation and changes to procurement practices. By 2021, the practice of avoiding open bidding had come to an end with 96% of national and subnational construction procurement using open bidding compared to 53% in 2018.4. Uganda 2022Q3 Quarterly report In the Uganda 4th Assurance report, and during the high level dialogues held in 2021, the programme recommended that; PPDA reviews procurement guidelines to provide for considerations for PWDS, implement resolutions in the cabinet paper on local content including fast tracking the local content bill, fast track the completion and classification of the national register of providers and institution of quarterly monitoring on local content as well as turning local content guidelines into regulations with sanctions and incentives for performance. The recommendations also indicated that PPDA and MoFPED should assess the efficacy of the guidelines annually and a review of the Standard Notice of Best Evaluated Bidder to provide for the estimated value of the works made by the Accounting Officer at the initiation of the procurement. Action: Parliament in April 2022, passed the Local Content Bill awaiting Presidential consent; the Bill provides local content monitoring and implementation, sanctions for non-compliance, guidelines on evaluation of local content bids, publication of a National data base of suppliers across all sectors, disclosure of registered local providers every 31st December, record of local content documents by respective entities, annual statements regarding entities compliance with local content obligations. If assented to by the President, the Bill will provide a strong legal framework for organizing local businesses to engage in the delivery of public infrastructure projects.5. Uganda 2024 UNBCEC report (OK noted)Review of Ugandan procurement law led to amendments of the PPDA Act to reduce bank guarantees for contractors not to exceed 1% reduced from 2%, and performance securities to 5% from 10% following recommendations from the Business integrity initiative in 2020. 6. Thailand2024 Q1 progress report Saving addedThree papers have been produced on CoST Thailand savings. - Data from the 2022, Assurance report revealed that from 601 projects, the cost saving was 9.77%, this is the difference between the budget and final contract value for the projects. - The second paper was an academic researcher from Chulalongkorn University and Thailand Development Research Institute who used government procurement data between 2017 – 2022 considering both CoST and non-CoST disclosed projects, revealed that cost savings stayed at 5% across different models used. They also assessed savings using the difference between budget and contract value. The propensity score matching method confirms these results, consistent with factors such as open bidding and agency categorisation. However, they used the data which is extracted from the Electronic Government Agency which may not be a completed dataset and in fact, CoST website launched in 2018, so the data from 2017 should not be used.- The third paper developed by the expert from Government Transparency Institute in Vienna, Austria who used data provided by the Comptroller General’s Department which is extracted from the Electronic Government Procurement System from 2018 – 2022. This study seemed to have most complete and valid data set, it showed that the difference between the budget and the contract value for CoST disclosed projects was around 6%, and for non-CoST disclosed projects is 5%. With the 1%, it can be seen that CoST disclosed projects are safer. (This is the study recommended by CoST Thailand as most accurate)7. Uganda  2024March 2024 Follow up done by OK to the programme who sent a letter from government showing progress.   The Ministry of Works and Transport implementing the handbook for classification of the private sector by developing an Electronic Contractor Registration and Classification System (e-CRCS) for proper record keeping and ensuring genuine players are participating in public procurement, commissioning stakeholder consultations to come up with appropriate evaluation criteria.  Impact 1.4 Number of new Government reforms that improve sector-wide and future public infrastructure programmes (Merged with 1.2) Impact 1.5 Number of new policy, executive, regulatory or legal instruments that mandate disclosure of infrastructure data based on the OC4IDS or CoST IDS at national, sub-national or sector level. (Includes efforts to enhance transparency)No.CountryYear action takenInformation sourceAction1. Costa Rica 2022Q3 Quarterly report Costa Rica secured an executive decree providing for the establishment of CoST CostaRica 2. Malawi 2022Q3 Quarterly report Following a lack of consistent disclosure after the IPPI had been aligned to the OC4IDS, the Malawi MSG engaged the Head of State to issue a directive to facilitate entities compliance with the FDM. The President issued a directive requiring all PDEs to upload their projects by 31st August, 2022 that saw an increase in disclosure of additional 147 from 40 projects, disclosure has consistently grown since this directive, with a few challenges associated with delays in approval of projects from the back end. 3. Jalisco 2022Q4 Quarterly report Influenced reforms to the Government Code and the Municipal Regulation of Public Works and Related Services, of the Municipal Government of Guadalajara, according to the CoST standard. Approved by the Plenary of the Guadalajara City Council on December 16, 2022 and published in the Municipal Gazette, Volume IV, issue 22, first section, and year 105 on December 21, 2022. Reforms effective as of January 1, 2023. The FDM can be accessed via https://transparencia.guadalajara.gob.mx/sites/default/files/GacetaTomoVIEjemplar22Secc1aDiciembre21-2022.pdf    4. Guatemala 2022Q4 Quarterly reportProgramme secured a commitment into the national OGP action plan; Formulation and implementation of anti-corruption mechanisms in infrastructure and are working towards its implementation, as part of the effort to implement this commitment, the government passed a law to strengthen the maintenance and construction of strategic infrastructure which provides for the implementation of the CoST disclosure process passed in April 2022. The Law to strengthen the maintenance and construction of strategic infrastructure Decree 21-2022, entered into force in April 2022, and in article 9 International transparency standards, indicate that the executing units responsible for the processes for contracting construction of infrastructure, they must comply with the provisions of Article 4 Ter, Transparency of work, Law of State Procurement, Decree 57-92, of the Congress of the Republic, related to compliance with the disclosure indicators of the Infrastructure Transparency Initiative - CoST .5. Panama 2023 Q1 Quarterly report In a bid to implement OGP commitments, CoST Panama engaged the Directorate of Public Procurement to Automate the EGP to publish data through the PanamaEnObras and align the platform to open data standards. As a result of this engagement, the General Directorate of Public Procurement (DGCP) automated data on the Country’s Electronic Procurement System, which has enabled PanamaEnObras to register disclosure over 500 projects, and the changes will continue until May 2023, expecting more projects to be disclosed, thereby, enhancing transparency. The data started running live in open formats in February 2023, the additional changes will include home page, and key indicators.6. Uganda  2023 Q1 progress report  CoST Uganda submitted recommendations to Ministry of Finance in January as part of CSOs which they further emphasized on government’s action during the ministry’s quarterly policy dialogue meetings, the issues engaged on included; increasing transparency and disclosure in the e-GP using the OC4IDS, fast tracking and popularisation of the local content regulations, adoption of the OC4IDS, implementation of beneficial ownership in procurement, inclusive procurement for special interest groups and participation of CSOs in the procurement process. As a result, the OC4IDS has been integrated in the TORs for the EGP vendor, the Ministry of Finance introduced BOT in the PPDA law, and integrated CSOs to observe bid opening. And this would also be included in the regulations and bid documents. In addition, at this event, the programme established that the World Bank had agreed to disclose their projects through the platform following their peer reviews of the EGP. CoST Uganda identified this concern in the 4th and 5th assurance reports where the bank’s project data could not be established on the disclosure portals.  7. West Lombok 2023Q2 Quarterly report West Lombok Drafted a Data Disclosure Law according to IDS in West Lombok Regency and presented it to the Regency. Awaiting approval, this law will act as an FDM (Copy not shared).8. Panama 2023Q2 Quarterly report Panama Passed a legal framework named Resolution No. DGCP-758-2023, on 12th June 2023, that is aimed at; Increase the number of: (1) entities disclosing their infrastructure projects, (2) projects disclosed, (3) data and documents to be disclosed. The resolution can be accessed via https://panamaenobras.gob.pa/assets/documentos/Resoluci%C3%B3n%20No.%20DGCP-758-2023.pdf9. Guatemala 2023Q2 Quarterly report Guatemala has completed its 6th OGP action plan and included a commitment on infrastructure transparency in the health and education sectors. 10. Jalisco 2023Q3 Quarterly report On 17th August 2023, a new regulation Mecanismo de Vigilancia y Control Ciudadano para las Obras Públicas de Guadalajara en la Plataforma de CoST Jalisco was passed.  This law will help the Municipality of Guadalajara to Implement the CoST social accountability process using model of independent citizen participation, aimed at strengthening democracy and social development to identify and prevent possible acts of corruption in the exercise of public resources through the contracting processes and execution of public works projects in the Municipality of Guadalajara with the use and support of the CoST Jalisco platform. https://transparencia.guadalajara.gob.mx/sites/default/files/GacetaTomoVEjemplar7Septiembre11-2023.pdf  11. Jalisco 2023Q3 Quarterly report On September 25th, 2023, the CMIC and Municipality of Guadalajara signed a collaboration agreement to use the CoST Jalisco platform, to help raise awareness of government’s work on public infrastructure projects, and publicise the Municipality’s public works regulations, to facilitate compliance. The collaborative agreement named “Transparency[JH11][OK12] in Infrastructure and Public Works” incorporates the CoST Infrastructure Data Standard (IDS). It also provides a benchmark and an opportunity for other Municipalities in Mexico to join and publish infrastructure data through the CoST Jalisco platform. https://guadalajara.gob.mx/gdlWeb/#/detalle/1894/Signa-Guadalajara-convenio-con-CMIC-Jalisco-para-transparentar-informacin-en-la-plataforma-CoST 12. Uganda  2023 Q3 progress report  Enhanced capacity of public officials on disclosure. The “1st ITI index revealed a lack of capacities among the public officials and the private sector on procurement regulations and bidding documents, information disclosure, infrastructure monitoring, and stakeholders’ engagement. It recommended training of PDEs and the private sector on public procurement regulations, bidding documents, and infrastructure monitoring, reporting and publication of data.  Require PDEs to integrate stakeholder engagement as part of the project design process. PPDA separated central and local government PDEs and designated respective new managers to help provide tailored technical support and monitor compliance by PDEs on the implementation of PPDA regulations. To enhance capacity of public officials on disclosure, PPDA had trained 16 entities with over 50 public officials.   13. Kaduna 2024Q1 progress report Secured an OC4IDS commitment into the OGP Third State Action Plan for implementation. The plan stipulates OC4IDS milestones for implementation. This is the first of its kind in Nigeria as a whole.14. Uganda 2024OK identified from a meeting at the prime ministers office. The office of the prime minister improved citizen engagement by commissioning regional barazas that discuss progress and citizens' concerns on infrastructure projects, these are officiated by the prime minister. Uganda scored 13% in citizen engagement in the first index.15. Uganda  2023 Q3 progress report  Enhanced capacity of public officials on disclosure. The “1st ITI index revealed a lack of capacities among the public officials and the private sector on procurement regulations and bidding documents, information disclosure, infrastructure monitoring, and stakeholders’ engagement. It recommended training of PDEs and the private sector on public procurement regulations, bidding documents, and infrastructure monitoring, reporting and publication of data.  Require PDEs to integrate stakeholder engagement as part of the project design process. PPDA separated central and local government PDEs and designated respective new managers to help provide tailored technical support and monitor compliance by PDEs on the implementation of PPDA regulations. To enhance capacity of public officials on disclosure, PPDA had trained 16 entities with over 50 public officials.   [JH1]Check with Slava if this 9 separate projects… may be names of those projects to help with this.[TCW2]Just wanted to check this one]’s ok to include? STMA also included an action as a 1.1 outcome which was changing the name on the library sign, which I haven’t included as I’m unsure of the impact of that improvement[JH3R2]This is fine… ultimately, its about service delivery.Principally a transparency story but a project 1.1 story if we can demonstrate that construction was accelerated.[JH4]What evidence do we have of this?[JH5]1.1 story but validation needed[JH6]1.1 story[JH7]1.1 story[JH8][JH9]1.2 and 1.4 are the same thing and should be merged… the language has just evolved.Done [OK10R9][JH11]This probably falls short of a reform.Could we discuss this to be clear of how we can record this John? or we could ask Jalisco Team to clarify. [OK12R11]35