December 2020
Version 1.0
Infrastructure
Transparency Index Manual
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
2
The Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI) is an instrument of CoST – the Infrastructure Transparency Initiative
(CoST) that measures levels of transparency and the quality of processes related to public infrastructure at both
national and sub-national levels. Collaboratively designed and based on international good practice and lessons
learned, its objective is to provide stakeholders with quality information that serves to promote transparency and
improve the management of public infrastructure.
PRODUCERS:
David Zamora, International Consultant, CoST.
Evelyn Hernandez, Head of Members and Affiliate Programmes, CoST.
TECHNICAL TEAM:
Hamish Goldie-Scot, Technical Adviser, CoST.
John Hawkins, Programme Director, CoST.
Bill Paterson, International Consultant, CoST.
PROJECT LEADERS:
Evelyn Hernández, Head of Members and Affiliate Programmes, CoST.
John Hawkins, Programme Director, CoST.
SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION:
Heizel Padilla, CoST Guatemala Manager.
Gracia Ramirez, CoST Honduras Management Adviser.
DISCLAIMER
This document presents a methodology to measure transparency in the infrastructure sector with the objective of providing
inputs for strengthening public institutions. Like other evaluation instruments, its impact depends on the use to which it is put.
It is not a methodology to evaluate corruption, not an instrument of internal control and not an instrument of perception.
It does not evaluate public officials, nor does it measure the general quality of procuring entities’ websites. The evaluations
and reports prepared with this methodology do not represent the opinion of CoST regarding the administrative work of
governments or procuring entities.
DECEMBER 2020
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
3
Abbreviations
CoST CoST – the Infrastructure Transparency Initiative
CoST IDS CoST Infrastructure Data Standard
ITI Infrastructure Transparency Index
OC4IDS Open Contracting for Infrastructure Data Standard
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
4
Table of contents
1. Introduction 6
1.1 Concept 6
1.2 The CoST approach 6
1.3 How the ITI was developed 7
1.4 Objectives 8
1.5 Principles 8
2. Content 10
2.1 Structure 10
2.2 Dimensions 10
		 Dimension 1: enabling environment 10
		 Dimension 2: capacities and processes 11
		 Dimension 3: citizen participation 11
		 Dimension 4: information disclosure 12
3. Implementation methodolgy 13
3.1 Preparation 13
		 Evaluation team 13
		 Materials 13
		 Evaluation period 14
		 Procuring entities sample 14
Infrastructure projects sample 15
		 Training 15
		 Logistics 15
3.2 Evaluation 16
		 Dimension 1: enabling environment 16
		 Dimension 2: capacities and processes 16
		 Dimension 3: citizen participation 16
Dimension 4: information disclosure 17
		 Recommendations about working with procuring entities 17
		 Remarks on objectivity 19
		 Processing 19
		 Reporting 20
Annexes		 21
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
5
Annexes
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument 21
Annex 2: Survey for interview or self-assessment 42
Annex 3: Procuring entities selection method and criteria 59
Annex 4: Guidance for the evaluation team training 60
Annex 5: Guide on lessons learned and techniques for an ITI implementation 62
Annex 6: Glossary of key terms 67
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
6
1. Introduction
1.1 Concept
CoST − the Infrastructure Transparency Initiative (CoST) works with government, the private sector and civil
society to improve transparency, participation and accountability in public infrastructure investment. It achieves
this by disclosing, validating and using infrastructure data at each stage of the infrastructure project cycle.
CoST’s experience indicates that this provides the evidence and process to help drive reforms that reduce
mismanagement, inefficiency and corruption, and improve the performance of the sector. Applying this approach
results in cost savings, helping to close the infrastructure financing gap and deliver better quality infrastructure
for millions of people.
CoST has developed the Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI) as a national or sub-national evaluation instrument to measure
levels of infrastructure transparency and the quality of the associated processes that improve participation and accountability. It
will help stakeholders from government, the private sector and civil society understand the relative strengths and weaknesses of
transparency, participation and accountability within the sector. It has been designed in a collaborative manner and is based on
international good practice and lessons learned.
This manual sets out a methodology for calculating a score for evaluated procuring entities in a national or sub-national
context. The individual scores are then used to generate an Index that compares the evaluated procuring entities. It is based on
the enabling conditions for strengthening transparency in the sector plus the transparency-related practices applied on recently
completed infrastructure projects (see Annex 6 for ITI terminology). In its design, the manual interprets transparency in a broad
and practical sense, not only by looking at it through the traditional lens of access to information, but also by considering
associated enablers and capacities. These include citizen participation that leads to the creation of public value through access
to information.
The final ITI score for each procuring entity is obtained from the weighted sums of four constituent dimensions, namely:
1. enabling environment
2. capacities and processes
3. citizen participation
4. information disclosure.
Although the ITI was designed for CoST members to evaluate and strengthen their national or sub-national programmes, other
interested parties can also use it as a tool to strengthen their institutions.
The rest of section 1 outlines the CoST approach, how the ITI was developed and the objectives and principles behind it. Section
2 sets out the structure for determining the ITI based on the four dimensions and a set of weighted variables with section 3
setting out a detailed methodology. The annexes provide a set of tools for determining the Index.
1.2 The CoST approach
CoST has developed an approach that is flexible to suit the context and aims to complement and add value to recognised good
practice. It provides a global standard for improving infrastructure transparency, participation and accountability based on four
core ‘features’: disclosure, assurance, multi-stakeholder working and social accountability.
1. Introduction
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
7
■ Disclosure is the publication of data from infrastructure projects. Forty data points are disclosed by procuring entities
at key stages throughout the entire project cycle in keeping with the CoST Infrastructure Data Standard (CoST IDS) and
increasingly in the Open Contracting for Infrastructure Data Standard (OC4IDS) format.
■ Assurance is an independent review that highlights the accuracy and completeness of the disclosed data and turns it into
compelling information that helps communicate issues of concern and areas of good practice.
■ Multi-stakeholder working brings together government, the private sector and civil society in a concerted effort to pursue
the common goal of improving transparency, accountability and ultimately performance in public infrastructure. This
is typically achieved through a multi-stakeholder group where each stakeholder has an equal voice in leading a CoST
programme.
■ Social accountability refers to efforts made to ensure that the disclosed data and assurance reports are taken up and
used by stakeholders – especially civil society and the private sector − to strengthen accountability and deliver practical
improvements.
1.3 How the ITI was developed
In 2016, the CoST International Secretariat asked CoST Honduras to develop and validate a first version of the ITI based on earlier
drafts that were variously considered as too simple or overly complex. It then asked CoST Guatemala to validate and test the CoST
Honduras approach. CoST Guatemala had some concerns with this and developed an alternative methodology and indices.
The two approaches were then assessed and a final integrated version was designed and tested in both countries. Following the
tests, lessons learned were captured and the index further improved.
Finally, the ITI was exposed to an international peer review process, where several experts carefully reviewed it and offered key
comments that helped shape this the final version of the instrument.
The lengthy process was necessary to ensure that there was a robust approach that stakeholders can have confidence in. In
due course, the methodology and indices will be updated to reflect the additional experience and lessons gained from its
global application.
A road project site visit in Honduras.
1. Introduction
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
8
1.4 Objectives
The aim of the ITI is to assess the level of transparency and accountability in public infrastructure over time. The objectives are
as follows:
■ to assess the state of infrastructure transparency and the capacity to improve transparency among procuring entities in a
country at national or sub-national level
■ to track and encourage progress and facilitate peer learning, while helping to hold procuring entities to account
■ to raise awareness of transparency at the national and international level, building on existing data standards such as the
CoST IDS and the OC4IDS.
The tool calculates a transparency score on a scale of zero to one (0-1) for a country’s national or sub-national public
infrastructure, as well as for each of its procuring entities. The scores are based on a large number of unique indicators. These
are independently evaluated to assess procuring entity practices and the national or sub-national conditions that give rise to
transparency and accountability in the local infrastructure sector.
The score is then published in the form of an index that ranks procuring entities and provides a national or sub-national
assessment. By identifying shortcomings in existing practice, an agenda can be developed to raise transparency and
accountability standards within the country or sector and improve ongoing infrastructure management practices.
The ITI results provide information that can guide public leaders and others with an interest in strengthening transparency and
accountability at the national or sub-national level, as well as in procuring entities. Follow-up ITI assessments should take place
annually to allow time for reforms to be introduced and take effect between evaluations.
While it is expected the ITI will be used by CoST members as part of their CoST programmes, it is also intended to be a measure
that is independent of CoST and capable of being applied (at national or sub-national level) in countries not participating in the
programme.
1.5 Principles
The development of the ITI is based on the following principles.
■ Relevance: offers information about the state of the legal framework, the institutional capacities and the disclosure of
information to improve infrastructure project administration and implementation.
■ Comprehensiveness: uses a comprehensive set of indices that allows for a broad assessment of the sector and in-depth
evaluation of a procuring entity.
■ Simplicity and trustworthiness: the methods for collecting and processing data are simple, so the results are readily
understood and can be made use of by different stakeholders.
■ Replicability and objectivity: any person replicating the ITI methodology will be able to obtain the same results as
presented in formal reports.
Further characteristics of the ITI are as follows.
■ Impartial: the coordination of the ITI methodology and its implementation is undertaken through an independent third
party with relevant expertise.
■ Periodic: the evaluation is typically performed annually to offer time between evaluations to improve transparency,
accountability and management of infrastructure delivery.
1. Introduction
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
9
■ Accurate: the indicators are determined using primary sources of information stemming from national websites and surveys
of key public officials.
■ Specific: the score for each indicator is determined against a single piece of information. This piece of information is not
re-used to determine the score of other indicators.
■ Informative: the results offer a snapshot of assessed procuring entities, which shed light more broadly on the national or
sub-national situation.
■ Evolving: the number of procuring entities assessed will grow in time to offer a more complete representation of the
national or sub-national context. In addition, the ITI is expected to be reviewed and updated after some years to ensure it
continues to offer relevant guidance for transparency in public infrastructure.
■ Constructive: the ITI can help stakeholders compare the level of transparency of procuring entities and monitor how this
changes over time. At this stage, the ITI it is not intended to compare countries as the methodology does not take into
account the contextual factors and it allows for some decisions that may lead to a slightly different approach being taken.
Nevertheless, CoST plans to use the lessons from the initial application of the ITI to allow for country comparisons at a later
stage of development.
As with other measuring instruments, the impact of an ITI evaluation depends on the extent to which its results are used by
those responsible for decision making.
1. Introduction
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
10
2. Content
2.1 Structure
The Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI) is made up of four building blocks known as dimensions, namely:
1. enabling environment
2. capacities and processes
3. citizen participation
4. information disclosure
The first dimension evaluates the national or
sub-national context with its legal framework.
The other three evaluate the capacities and
transparency outcomes at the procuring
entities level. Together, the four dimensions
align with empirical studies that describe
how the quality of procurement outcomes
depends on a combination of the regulatory
framework and institutional capacities.
Each of the four dimensions is divided into
a series of components to allow for their
comprehensive evaluation. The result is a four-
level hierarchy: the dimensions are formed
by variables, which in turn are made up of
sub-variables, which in turn are composed
of indicators (see Figure 2.1).
All the indicators are individually evaluated and scored. A set of weighted indicator scores then gives a sub-variable score; a set
of weighted sub-variable scores gives a variable score; and a set of weighted variable scores gives a dimension score. A national
or sub-national ITI score is finally obtained from the weighted sum of the four dimension scores.
2.2 Dimensions
DIMENSION 1: ENABLING ENVIRONMENT
Dimension 1 assesses national or sub-national conditions enabling transparency for the infrastructure sector considering the
regulatory framework and centralised digital tools. It has one variable, three sub-variables and 12 indicators. The complete list
of indicators is provided in Annex 1. The variable and sub-variables of the dimension are:
■ Legal framework and digital tools
● Access to public information regulatory framework
● Transparency standards in the public infrastructure sector
● National digital information tools.
All indicators of this dimension are national or sub-national and are measured once at the country or local level, irrespective of
the number of procuring entities selected for evaluation. Its results offer feedback to strengthen the national or sub-national
environment, not processes within institutions. The score for the dimension is obtained through the weighted sum of the
underlying indicators.
Figure 2.1: ITI hierarchy example
ITI
Dimensions
Variables
Sub-variables
Indicators
2. Content
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
11
The indicators in this dimension are evaluated using information that is typically available from online sources such as websites
containing national regulatory frameworks and information linked to the sector, such as those focused on transparency, public
procurement, public infrastructure and public finances.
DIMENSION 2: CAPACITIES AND PROCESSES
Dimension 2 assesses the soundness of procuring entities’ procedures and capacities to disclose data and information. It has
two variables, five sub-variables and 25 indicators. The complete list of indicators is provided in Annex 1. The variables and sub-
variables of the dimension are:
■ Institutional capacities
● Basic knowledge
● Digital capacities
■ Institutional processes
● Procedures to disclose information
● Enablers and barriers to disclose information
● Control over infrastructure projects disclosure.
All the indicators of this dimension evaluate procuring entities, not national or sub-national conditions. The indicators are
evaluated once in each of “n
e” selected procuring entities (see paragraph 3.1.5 on how procuring entities should be selected).
The dimension results offer feedback to strengthen capacities and processes at the procuring entity level. The score of the
dimension is obtained through the weighted sums of the underlying indicators for each of procuring entity.
The data required to evaluate the indicators from this dimension are captured by a survey that has to be undertaken by a
selected government officer at each procuring entity through either self-assessment or interview. Details of the survey and
indicator scoring system are provided in Annex 2.
DIMENSION 3: CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
Dimension 3 evaluates the opportunities provided by procuring entities for citizen participation and how citizens can use the
disclosed public information. It has one variable, two sub-variables and 12 indicators. The complete list of indicators is provided
in Annex 1. The variable and sub-variables of the dimension are:
■ Participation practices
● Participation opportunities
● Use of information by citizens.
All the indicators of this dimension evaluate procuring entities. The indicators are evaluated once for each of “n
e
” selected
procuring entities (see paragraph 3.1.5 on how procuring entities should be selected). The results from this dimension offer
feedback to strengthen a procuring entity’s citizen’s participation practices. The score for this dimension is obtained through the
weighted sums of the underlying indicators for each procuring entity.
The data required to evaluate the indicators from this dimension are captured by a survey (the same as for dimension 2) that
has to be undertaken by a selected government officer at each procuring entity through either self-assessment or interview.
Details of the survey and indicator scoring system are provided in Annex 2.
2. Content
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
12
DIMENSION 4: INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
Dimension 4 assesses the amount of project data and information disclosed by the procuring entities according to the CoST
Infrastructure Data Standard or the Open Contracting for Infrastructure Data Standard. It has one variable, six sub-variables and
44 indicators. The complete list of indicators is provided in Annex 1. The variable and sub-variables of the dimension are:
■ Disclosure practices
● Project identification
● Project preparation
● Execution or construction contract procurement
● Supervision or project management contract procurement
● Execution or construction contract implementation
● Supervision or project management contract implementation
All indicators of this dimension evaluate “n
p” infrastructure projects developed by each of “n
e” procuring entities (see
paragraphs 3.1.5 and 3.1.6 on how procuring entities and projects should be selected). The dimension results offer feedback
to the selected procuring entities to strengthen their information disclosure. The overall score of the dimension is obtained
through averaging the weighted sum of the underlying indicators for each of “n
p” projects.
The indices in this dimension are evaluated using information that is typically available from online sources such as websites
containing information on public infrastructure projects and public procurement and other websites showing information
linked to these subjects.
Table 1 below presents a summary of the evaluation subjects and data collection methods for each of the four dimensions.
DIMENSION 1:
enabling environment
DIMENSION 2:
capacities and processes
DIMENSION 3:
citizens participation
DIMENSION 4:
information disclosure
Evaluation
subject
National or sub-national
conditions Procuring entities Procuring entities Procuring entities’ projects
Data collection
method Desktop research Self-assessment or interview Self-assessment or interview Desktop research
Table 1: Summary of the evaluation subjects and the data collection methods for each ITI dimension
2. Content
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
13
3. Implementation methodology
Implementing the Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI) methodology entails following a sequence of four main stages to
arrive at the final ITI score, as illustrated in Figure 3.1.
3.1 Preparation
EVALUATION TEAM
Identifying an appropriate evaluation team is vital for successfully implementing the methodology that determines an ITI
score. Regarding knowledge, each member of the team needs to have a clear understanding of CoST’s principles and approach,
sufficient experience of government portals that contain the information required for evaluation, and experience in requesting
public information and using collaboration tools.
The size of the evaluation team will depend on the time and resources available, as well as the number of procuring entities to
be evaluated. The shorter the time, the bigger the team should be; and the more the procuring entities, the bigger the team
should be. However, there will always be a constraint, as the number of people in the team and the time allocated will be
limited by the resources available. A balance therefore needs to be considered when defining the team size. It is recommended
that there should be a minimum of three people in the evaluation team (see section 3.2).
In terms of the roles, the team should have a coordinator and evaluators. The coordinator is in charge of methodological and
administrative arrangements, as well as quality control, data processing and reporting. The evaluators are in charge of all
data collection based on the ITI methodology. If the team only comprises three people, the minimum number recommended,
the coordinator will also need to perform the role of third evaluator. The division of responsibilities between the coordinator
and the evaluators implies the need for a close relationship between them at all times during data collection. The coordinator
participates in all the ITI implementation stages, while the evaluators only participate in the data collection during the
evaluation stage.
MATERIALS
All working documents and equipment required to conduct the evaluation need to be prepared before the evaluation begins.
The evaluation team will need computers, internet access and the files and forms used to conduct the evaluations. If the survey
to collect the data for dimensions 2 and 3 is through interviews, the team will need to print copies of the questionnaire if an
electronic version cannot be used. If the survey is to be conducted through self-assessment, the team should always use an
electronic form of the questionnaire to share with the selected public officer.
Figure 3.1: The four stages to determine an ITI score
PREPARATION
EVALUATION
PROCESSING
REPORTING
FINAL
ITI SCORE
1
2
3
4
3. Implementation methodolgy
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
14
3. Implementation methodolgy
EVALUATION PERIOD
The information required for determining the ITI has to be applicable during a specific evaluation period (e.g. 1 January to
31 December). An evaluation period needs to be established to avoid using evidence that was used in a previous evaluation
and to ensure a consistent approach for all procuring entities. There will then be a shorter data collection period when this
information is collected (e.g. 1 April to 31 May).
The evaluation period needs to be defined from the outset, clearly understood by the evaluation team and the procuring
entities, and documented in final reports.
PROCURING ENTITIES SAMPLE
There is a need to define the number and identity of the specific procuring entities that will be evaluated. The amount of work
and time required for the evaluation will generally be proportional to the number of entities evaluated.
To determine the number of procuring entities, the available resources and time have to be considered. A provisional allocation
of 0.5 days per procuring entity is suggested to prepare the basic numbers. It is then important to consider the scale and
structure of the national or sub-national context.
Based on experience of testing the ITI methodology in Honduras and Guatemala, it is recommended to start by using a
stratified random method (see example in Annex 3). This involves selecting a sample or around 20% of all procuring entities
in smaller more centralised economies, or up to 100 procuring entities in larger more decentralised economies. In both cases a
complete list of all procuring entities with basic information (such budget size, category and sector) will be needed to ensure
a representative sample. The sample size should increase progressively to 100% or 500 procuring entities over a 4 to 5 year
period. However, if the number of procuring entities at the national or sub-national level is low, all procuring entities should be
included from the outset.
An alternative method can be to select the procuring entities that represent 20% of infrastructure investment and progressively
increase this number. A combination of the two methods can also be used and this approach can be refined as more is learned
about its application. The expectation is that as the number
of procuring entities and investment increases, so too will the
accuracy of the overall picture of transparency, accountability
and participation across the infrastructure sector.
The use of the stratified random method will allow a balanced
selection in the procuring entities sample according to their
different categories. To determine the procuring entities
sample, the recommended criteria would include:
■ infrastructure budget size (as an indicator of the socio-
economic impact of its projects)
■ category or type (e.g. central government, municipality,
autonomous)
■ sector (e.g. education, health, energy).
The categories can be based on the Open Contracting for
Infrastructure Data Standard (OC4IDS) sectors and sub-sectors
(see Annex 3).
The most important aspect of the criteria is that they result in
the selection of a sample of procuring entities that represents CoST Guatemala highlights infrastructure issues to the media.
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
15
3. Implementation methodolgy
the greatest contribution to economic and social impact while making it clear that any procuring entity could be randomly
selected. The criteria have to apply to all procuring entities without exception and should be documented and transparent.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS SAMPLE
The selection of projects to be evaluated per procuring entity is a key element for determining the ITI. For each selected entity,
the same number of projects should be selected for the evaluation using a selective and random sampling approach. In CoST
countries, it is preferable to select projects that have not previously been part of the assurance process. The same criteria for
selecting the projects has to be applied to all procuring entities.
It is a requirement that each project for evaluation is completed to allow an evaluation of the whole project cycle. Each
completed project is evaluated using the indicators in dimension 4 on information disclosure. The indicators for this dimension
are evaluated “n
p” times for each procuring entity, where “np” equals the number of completed projects selected for
evaluation.
A minimum of two projects per procuring entity is required. Using a mix of selective and random methods, a minimum of
one project should be selected based on its perceived importance to stakeholders (for example) and the other would then be
randomly selected from the total list of projects implemented by each procuring entity.
To select projects based on importance, it is recommended to start by ranking them by their budget. Two people can then
look only at the projects with the highest budgets from each of the procuring entities and independently score them based on
their perceived impact. If there is a significant difference between the scores allocated, a third person can join to resolve the
difference. From the set of projects with the highest budget, the one with the highest perceived impact should be selected. In
the interests of transparency and consistency, the criteria used for selecting the projects to be evaluated should be published
with the results report.
TRAINING
Training is needed to ensure every member of the team is capable of evaluating each ITI indicator in the same consistent
manner. The evaluation instrument and its processes need to be studied, understood and applied. Different scenarios and
complexities that might occur during the data collection also need be discussed and worked through during training.
Recommendations for evaluation team training are provided in Annex 4.
LOGISTICS
The preparation stage also requires consideration of the different logistical aspects of the evaluation, including the location
where evaluations will take place and other pertinent details. If the survey is to be undertaken through interviews, it will be
necessary to include transportation to reach each procuring entity in the budget.
Logistics also includes the communication required with each procuring entity to collect the data. This entails drafting formal
letters, making arrangements for the interviews or self-assessments, follow-up communications, invitations and so on. Finally, it
is necessary to ensure effective communication with other important stakeholders, such as the CoST multi-stakeholder group.
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
16
3.2 Evaluation
The evaluation stage is when all indicators are evaluated. Each of the four ITI dimensions have their own evaluation process, as
follows.
DIMENSION 1: ENABLING ENVIRONMENT
Dimension 1 assesses national or sub-national conditions enabling transparency for the infrastructure sector and its indicators
are determined through desktop research. Each indicator requires inputs from at least two evaluators, who make an initial
evaluation independently of each other to avoid any bias.
If the results from both evaluators for each indicator are the same, then the results are considered final. If there is a difference
between them, then a third evaluator resolves the difference. This third evaluation must coincide with one of the first two and
is then considered final. If in the rare case where the third evaluator believes that both initial evaluators are wrong, that specific
indicator is returned to the two initial evaluators for a review. It is highly probable that after this review, the third evaluator will
agree with one of the two initial evaluators.
The quality of the collected data in dimension 1 is achieved through this approach, which ensures that the same observation
will always be independently obtained by two different evaluators.
DIMENSION 2: CAPACITIES AND PROCESSES
Dimension 2 assesses the soundness of a procuring entity’s procedures and capacities to disclose data and information. Its
indicators are evaluated through a survey that is completed once by an officer at the procuring entity. Normally, this officer
is recognised as the “information officer”. This is the person who, officially or unofficially, coordinates the efforts linked to
the national access-to-information law. This means that they are likely to be familiar with the principles of transparency,
accountability, open data, citizen participation, collaboration and innovation.
The survey can be undertaken through an interview or self-assessment. Both methods require the officer to respond to all
questions and provide supporting explanations. The interview method potentially offers a means of ensuring more complete
and fuller responses, but requires more resources to collect the data. The self-assessment option may require less effort and
fewer resources but can nevertheless result in good data if there is engagement and validation. The local evaluation team needs
to consider their situation and context to decide which of the two methods is more practical. Experience within CoST suggest
that both methods can work effectively when well conducted.
The quality of data collected by the survey should be verified by triangulating the results with other sources of information.
These include the following.
■ Endorsement, which is obtained by a signed statement of veracity of the information provided (see Annex 2).
■ Evidence that validates the assigned scores. If the evidence (such as explanations, documents, websites, notice boards and
newspapers) that was provided for a specific question does not match with the score assigned by the officer, the evaluation
team can go back to the officer to ask for more information and/or request further consideration of the score assigned to
the specific question.
DIMENSION 3: CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
Dimension 3 assesses the opportunities provided by procuring entities for citizen participation and how citizens use the
disclosed public information. Its indicators are evaluated through the same survey that is completed by the information officer
of each procuring entity.
The survey is undertaken by the individual either through self-assessment or interview. The local evaluation team will decide
which method is more appropriate in their context. It is initially recommended to use the same method for all evaluated
procuring entities using the same evidence and endorsement control method as used with the other dimensions.
3. Implementation methodolgy
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
17
DIMENSION 4: INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
Dimension 4 assesses the amount of data and information disclosed by the procuring entities according to the CoST
Infrastructure Data Standard or the OC4IDS and its indicators are measured through desktop research. These indicators require
two or three evaluators, as in dimension 1. The quality of the collected data comes from the same method, where a single
observation will always be obtained through independent evaluation by two different people.
RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT WORKING WITH PROCURING ENTITIES
In some conditions, it can be anticipated that obtaining data from procuring entities will be challenging. For this reason, the
following approach is recommended.
■ Collect the contact information of the procuring entity’s access-to-information unit. Since the information required by
the ITI typically comes from this unit (or the equivalent, as defined in applicable national legislation), having the contact
information of government officers at the unit can accelerate and facilitate the data collection process.
■ Prepare a formal written invitation to the ITI process, copying the procuring entity main authority, that covers these points:
● summary of the ITI concept
● benefits to be obtained by the procuring entity and the country
● legal framework that allows access to public information
● information requirements (a copy of the survey can be attached)
● request to confirm participation.
■ Schedule the interviews or request the completion of the self-assessments. If interviews are to be conducted, it will be
necessary to schedule all the meetings before the evaluation starts to ensure that the interviews are conducted during
the evaluation period. If there are to be self-assessments, share the survey form with the procuring entities and define
a deadline for completion. Provide the contact information of the evaluation team to respond to any questions. Always
provide a completed example response, either for the interview or the self-assessment, to make sure that the officer at the
procuring entity understands how to answer the survey questions correctly.
CoST Ukraine showcases its innovative tools.
3. Implementation methodolgy
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
18
Communicate in an empathetic way. Written and verbal communications with government officers at the procuring entities
should always be in positive terms and need to be formal, standardised and make reference to the access-to-information law
or any other relevant legislation. It is important to show to the officers the benefits to their day-to-day work, to the procuring
entity and to citizens that would come from the ITI results. An empathetic and purposeful attitude is key to generating reliable
communications with these officers and is likely to increase the likelihood of receiving information that reveals the challenges
faced by the procuring entities and the general contribution generated by the ITI.
■ Define a protocol to follow when responses are not given by procuring entities. Daily workload and a lack of willingness
are barriers that can limit the access to information to conduct an ITI evaluation. To address these problems, it is necessary
before initiating the evaluation to design a protocol that considers national regulations, context and public-sector culture.
An example of a protocol when conducting a self-assessment is as follows.
● Initial follow-up phone call (or email) from the evaluation team within the deadline to ask the procuring entity if there are
questions or problems with the survey.
● Follow-up phone call (or email) from the evaluation team when the deadline has just expired to try to commit the procuring entity
to a new and prompt deadline.
● Another follow-up phone call (or email) from the evaluation team within the second deadline to ask the procuring entity if there
are questions or problems with the survey.
● Further follow-up phone calls (or emails) when the second deadline has expired, from an ITI-related high-level authority such as
the CoST country manager, a CoST multi-stakeholder group member or a high-level official from the national access-to-public-
information agency or equivalent.
● Document the lack of response from the procuring entity after the described process. The ITI results report should have a section
clearly stating the protocol followed and identify the procuring entities that did not contribute with the public information required
by the ITI. This section will help to minimise the lack of contribution in future evaluations.
■ Invite the procuring entities to the ITI results presentation. Make sure the government officers from the procuring entities
that participated in the ITI evaluation, among other people, receive an invitation to the results presentation event, share
the written results with these officers and invite them to get closer to the initiative and to ask any questions they may have
related to the process or the instrument.
Government officials at a CoST Uganda workshop.
3. Implementation methodolgy
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
19
As a general note, since procuring entities will be evaluated and compared (which is an essential part of the ITI) with the
information they provide, it is necessary to have formal and standard communications with them to make sure none receives
preferential treatment that may somehow influence the results. Also, it must be made clear that comparisons will only be
expressed in a constructive manner.
REMARKS ON OBJECTIVITY
The ITI has three different methods to minimise the effect of subjectivity when conducting an evaluation. These are as follows.
■ Scoring scales: each ITI indicator has its own points scoring scale of zero to five (0−5). The scale describes the possible
answers or scenarios for each indicator and what score has to be assigned based on the conditions that were found during
the evaluation. The possible answers or scenarios provide clarity to the evaluators and reduce their level of subjectivity
when assigning scores. All indicators and their scoring scales are shown in Annex 1, with more detailed guidance on
dimensions 2 and 3 in Annex 2.
■ Double review: all indicators that require desktop research (those in dimensions 1 and 4) have to go through a process
where each indicator is evaluated by two or three different people. The results generated by two people have to be the
same to be acceptable for processing.
■ Triangulation method: all indicators evaluated with survey information (those in dimensions 2 and 3) are subject to a
triangulation method that combines evidence and endorsement. First, the government officer who completes the survey is
required to sign a statement of veracity of information (see Annex 2). Second, their answers are reviewed by the evaluation
team according to the evidence provided to validate the scores that were assigned. The data is only accepted for processing
after approval by the evaluation team.
The combination of the three methods allows an ITI evaluation to maintain objectivity, replicability and trustworthiness.
PROCESSING
The data collected has to be converted to assign an score that ranges from zero to one (0−1) for each indicator, sub-variable,
variable and dimension, based on their assessment and weightings. All ITI components have associated differentiated
weightings according to their relative importance (see Annex 1). The weightings are based on the validation process and will be
reviewed over time. To obtain the scores, the following process is applied.
■ Each indicator, sub-variable, variable and dimension has a weighting in the range of zero to one (0−1).
■ Each indicator is also given a score ranging from zero to one (0-1). For simplicity the indicators are evaluated on a points
scale of zero to five (0−5) so, for example, if the evaluation is 2 points, the assigned score is 0.4.
■ Each indicator contributes a proportion to the score given to the sub-variable. That proportion is determined by the
indicator weighting multiplied by the score obtained by the indicator. For example, if the indicator weighting is 0.24 and
the score is 0.8 (because it had an evaluation of 4 points), then this indicator contributes a score 0.192 to the sub-variable
score. The score for the sub-variable is defined by adding the contribution of all the indicators it contains.
■ The total score of each variable and dimension is obtained by following the same process as above.
■ The national or sub-national ITI score is obtained by summing weighted scores of all four dimensions, giving a value
between zero and one (0−1). For dimensions 2 and 3, the scores of each procuring entity are added together and then
divided by the number “n
e” of procuring entities to give an average score. For dimension 4, the scores of each project are
added together and then divided by the number “n
p” of projects to give an average score.
■ The procuring entity ITI score is obtained by summing the alternatively weighted scores of dimensions 2, 3 and 4 (see
Annex 1). Again, for dimension 4, the scores of each project are added together and then divided by the number “n
p
” of
projects to give an average score.
3. Implementation methodolgy
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
20
The main output of the processing stage is a database where all the procuring entities appear with their scores from each
indicator, sub-variable, variable and dimension. The database also contains the scores for the national or sub-national ITI
components.
REPORTING
The reporting stage involves the preparation, publication and public presentation of the final results report. The report should
contain as a minimum: a description of the methodology adopted, together with associated technical decisions (such as the
procuring entities sample size and selection); the ITI results for each evaluated procuring entity; the national results with
associated analysis; comparisons (between procuring entities and previous results) with associated analysis; and conclusions.
The scores in the reports should be presented at the following levels:
■ National or sub-national ITI score: this is the global score obtained by the weighted sum of the four ITI dimensions. It also
shows the specific scores for each dimension, considering that the national score for dimensions 2, 3 and 4 are obtained
from the average for all evaluated procuring entities and their projects.
■ Procuring entities’ ITI scores: this is the total score obtained by each evaluated procuring entity, with their detailed scores
for each indicator, sub-variable and variable in dimensions 2, 3 and 4.
■ Procuring entity scorecards: this is a visualisation summary of the main scores obtained by procuring entities, using charts
and figures. The visualisation is prepared for each evaluated procuring entity.
■ ITI results database: this contains the disaggregated scores for each dimension, variable, sub-variable and indicator. The
database has to be enclosed with complete results, as open data. This file is accessible to multiple actors and gives them the
opportunity to make use of the data to work with others to identify shortcomings in current practices and thereby achieve
positive institutional, social and economic change.
After the presentation and publication of the ITI results, it is normal that procuring entities and other stakeholders raise any
questions or concerns they may have, ask for follow-up meetings and, in some cases, request training or other forms of support.
The organisation(s) leading the ITI will need to have the capacity to respond to these needs.
Civic engagement facilitated by CoST Thailand.
3. Implementation methodolgy
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
21
Annexes
Annex 1. Evaluation instrument
Annex 2. Survey for interview or self-assessment
Annex 3. Procuring entities selection method and criteria
Annex 4. Guidance for the evaluation team training
Annex 5. Guide on lessons learned and techniques for an ITI implementation
Annex 6. Glossary of key terms
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
The Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI) score (range 0−1) is calculated as follows:
ITI score = ∑wd ( ∑wv ( ∑wsv ( ∑wi.i ) ) )
Where wi is the weighting for each evaluated indicator score i (range 0−1) within each sub-variable, wsv is the weighting for
each sub-variable score within each variable, wv is the weighting for each variable score within each dimension and wd is the
weighting for each dimension score within the ITI.
All dimensions, variables, sub-variables, indicators, indicator points scale and weightings are shown in the following table.
The full scoring process for indicators in dimensions 2 and 3 are contained in Annex 2.
When calculating a national or sub-national ITI score, the dimension 2 and 3 scores are calculated by adding the respective
dimension scores for each procurement entity and then dividing each one by the number of procuring entities (n
e) to provide
the average values. For dimension 4, the scores for each project are added together and then divided by the number of
projects (n
p).
When calculating a procuring entity ITI score (individually or in groups), dimension 1 and its indicators, sub-variables and
variables are not included and larger values of wd are used for dimensions 2, 3 and 4 (see weighting column in table below).
Again for dimension 4, the scores for each project are added together and then then divided by the number of projects (n
p).
While the indicators have different evaluation processes, as explained in this manual, all need to be evaluated during the
same evaluation period. For example, if evaluations are conducted annually, indicators need to be evaluated based on
evidence and justifications accumulated between the previous evaluation and the present, without using information from
previous evaluations.
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
22
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
1 Dimension Enabling
environment
Evaluates national or sub-national
conditions enabling transparency for
the infrastructure sector considering the
legal and regulatory framework and the
centralised digital information tools.
The indicators of this dimension are evaluated just once at the
national or sub-national level.
0.20 when calculating
the national or sub-
national ITI score
0.00 when calculating
the procuring entity
score (i.e. not used)
1.1
Variable Legal
framework
and digital
tools
1.00
1.1.1
Sub-
variable
Access
to public
information
regulatory
framework
Evaluates the existence of a national
regulation on access to public
information, or other related regulation,
relevant to the infrastructure sector.
0.30
1.1.1.1
Indicator Access-
to-public
information
law
There is a national law that guarantees
the access to public information in all
public sector institutions, which applies
to all material held by or on behalf
of public authorities with only few
exceptions contained in the same law.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = The law does not exist;
2 = It exists, but based on the text does not apply to all public
institutions and does not apply to all material;
3 = It exists and complies with only one of the two conditions;
5 = It exists and complies with the two conditions.
0.25 National or
sub-national
1.1.1.2
Indicator Right to
request public
information
There exists within the national legal
framework the right of citizens to
request and obtain non-published public
information with
•
access to both information and
records/documents
•
no need to provide reasons for their
requests
•
clear maximum timelines
•
access to all public institutions.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = This provision does not exist in the laws or regulations of
access to information, or there is no law of access to information;
1 = The provision to request non-published information exists but
none of the four conditions are covered by the law;
2 = The provision exists but only one condition is covered by the
law;
3 = The provision and two conditions are covered by the law;
4 = The provision and three conditions are covered by the law;
5 = The provision and the four conditions are covered by the law.
0.25 National or
sub-national
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
23
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
1.1.1.3
Indicator Sanctions
over non-
compliance
with access
to public
information
mandates
Within the national legal framework
there are sanctions for non-compliance
on proactive and reactive disclosure of
information.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = No sanctions exist in the laws or regulations, or no law of
access to information exists;
3 = The sanctions only apply for non-compliance to proactive and
reactive publication, or do not apply to all public sector institutions;
5 = There are sanctions in the law for non-compliance with
proactive and reactive publications and they apply to all public
sector institutions.
0.25 National or
sub-national
1.1.1.4
Indicator Organisation
guaranteeing
the sanctions
Within the national legal framework
there are organisations or mechanisms
that are
•
protected against political and
financial interference
•
responsible for overseeing the
compliance of access-to-information
requirements
•
compliant with the sanctions
determined by law.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = There is no organisation or mechanism in charge of enforcing
compliance with the access-to- information law/regulation, or there
is no access to information law/regulation;
2 = There are organisations or mechanisms with only one of the
three conditions covered;
3 = There are organisations or mechanisms with two of the three
conditions covered;
5 = There are organisations or mechanisms with the three
conditions covered.
0.25 National or
sub-national
1.1.2
Sub-
variable
Transparency
standards in
the public
infrastructure
sector
Evaluates the existence of laws and
regulations that guarantee access
to information in accordance with a
transparency data standard for public
infrastructure.
0.45
1.1.2.1
Indicator Proactive
publication of
information
on public
procurement
processes
There is a national act or regulation that
guarantees proactive disclosure of public
procurement information in all public
sector institutions.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = It is not required by the law, or there is no law of access to
information;
3 = It is required by the law but does not apply to all public sector
institutions and/or the procurement data for disclosure are limited;
5 = It is required by the law, applies to all public sector institutions
and the procurement file related to all procurement stages is
required for disclosure.
0.20 National or
sub-national
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
24
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
1.1.2.2
Indicator Proactive
publication of
information
on public
infrastructure
projects
There is a national act or regulation
that guarantees proactive disclosure on
public infrastructure projects in all public
sector institutions.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = It is not required by the law, or there is no law of access to
information;
3 = It is required by the law but does not apply to all public sector
and/or the project infrastructure data for disclosure are limited;
5 = It is required by the law, applies to all public sector institutions
and the full infrastructure project file is required for disclosure.
0.20 National or
sub-national
1.1.2.3
Indicator Infrastructure
data
disclosure
standard
There is a national act or regulation
that defines a data disclosure standard
in public infrastructure (such as a
formal disclosure requirement (FDR)
requesting for the data of CoST IDS or
OC4IDS), that must be complied with
by all national or sub-national procuring
entities.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = FDR does not exist;
3 = Exists but does not apply to all public institutions;
5 = Exists and applies to all institutions.
0.20 National or
sub-national
1.1.2.4
Indicator Infrastructure
data
disclosure
standard
proactively
published as
open data
The national act or regulation with
the infrastructure data disclosure
standard requests proactive disclosure of
infrastructure projects as open data.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = Formal disclosure of open data is not required, or there is no
law providing the standard for the data publication;
3 = Formal disclosure of open data is required, but partially
because does apply to all public sector or does not apply to the full
data standard (that is the CoST IDS or OC4IDS);
5 = It requires the publication of all the data standard for
transparency in public infrastructure (that is the CoST IDS or
OC4IDS) as open data in all public sector entities.
0.20 National or
sub-national
1.1.2.5
Indicator Organisation
responsible
for the
infrastructure
data
disclosure
standard
Within the law or regulation there is an
organisation responsible for overseeing
the compliance of the publication
of information according to the
infrastructure data disclosure standard.
Official websites
on national
legislation
0 = There is no organisation responsible for overseeing compliance
with the regulation, or there is no relation on the standard for data
publication;
3 = There is an organisation but it does not have the power to
oversee compliance;
5 = There is an organisation and it oversees compliance with the
standard.
0.20 National or
sub-national
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
25
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
1.1.3
Sub-
variable
National
digital
information
tools
Evaluates the availability of national
digital tools that facilitate transparency
in public infrastructure.
0.25
1.1.3.1
Indicator Centralised
digital
information
platforms
There are centralised national or
sub-national digital platforms with
information on public infrastructure
projects.
National
websites
0 = There are none;
2-3-4 = There are, but access to information is partial;
5 = There are and the access to information they offer is complete.
0.30 National or
sub-national
1.1.3.2
Indicator Easy access to
information
in digital
information
platforms
The information that offers the details
of public infrastructure projects, used for
example for verification reports, is easily
accessible, complete and available in an
orderly manner in digital format.
National
websites
0 = The information is not easily accessible, or there are no digital
systems;
2-3-4 = The information is partially ordered, complete and easily
accessible;
5 = It is easily accessible, ordered and complete.
0.40 National or
sub-national
1.1.3.3
Indicator Infrastructure
projects
geographic
information
system (GIS)
platform
There is a web platform tailored to
the needs of citizens that allows in a
simple and visual manner, access to a
GIS database of infrastructure projects
with key information on works under
execution or recently executed.
National
websites
0 = There is no platform for geographical visualisation;
2-3-4 = There is a platform but it is outdated, or shows little
information, or does not show all public infrastructure projects;
5 = There is a complete platform with comprehensive information.
0.30 National or
sub-national
2 Dimension Capacities
and processes
Evaluates the soundness of procuring
entities’ procedures and capacities to
disclose data and information.
The indicators of this dimension are evaluated “n
e
” times at the
procuring entity level.
0.25 when calculating
the national or sub-
national ITI score
0.35 when calculating
the procuring entity
ITI score
2.1
Variable Institutional
capacities
0.40
2.1.1
Sub-
variable
Basic
knowledge
Assesses the knowledge of public
officers on subjects of access to
information and transparency in public
infrastructure.
0.50
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
26
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
2.1.1.1
Indicator Knowledge
about the
access-to-
information
law
The officer who completes the
survey knows the national access-to-
information law on public information
and the main provisions.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer does not know the law;
1 = Only knows it exists without being able to quote its content;
2-3-4 = Can quote key elements;
5 = Describes what is public, the proactive and reactive publication,
the request of access and the organisation that guarantees
compliance.
0.20 Institutional
2.1.1.2
Indicator Knowledge
about
transparency
initiatives
in the
infrastructure
sector
The officer who completes the survey
knows the existence of the transparency
initiatives in the infrastructure sector
and their objectives.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer does not know them;
1 = Only knows they exists, without being able to quote on their
scope;
2-3-4 = Can quote key elements;
5 = Describes what is CoST, the data standard, the FDR, the
multisectoral group and the assurance of projects.
0.20 Institutional
2.1.1.3
Indicator Knowledge
about the
transparency
data standard
in the
infrastructure
sector
The officer who completes the
survey knows the national or sub-
national transparency data standard
for the infrastructure sector and its
requirements.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer does not know it;
1 = Only knows it exists without being able to quote its scope;
2-3-4 = Can quote key elements;
5 = Besides the key elements, may indicate the level of adoption of
his/her institution.
0.20 Institutional
2.1.1.4
Indicator Knowledge
about
sanctions
due to non-
compliance
on the access-
to-public-
information
law
The officer who completes the survey
knows the sanctions applied for non-
compliance with the standards of access
to public information and/or State
contracts.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer does not know about sanctions;
2-3-4 = Knows about them partially;
5 = Knows about the sanctions adequately or knows that the laws
or regulations do not include sanctions (if it were so).
0.20 Institutional
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
27
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
2.1.1.5
Indicator Knowledge
about
different data
categories
The officer who completes the
survey knows what constitutes and
the differences between: public
data, personal data, sensitive data,
confidential data and reserved data.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer does not know what the quoted type of data is;
2-3-4 = Knows them partially;
5 = Knows them and can differentiate them clearly.
0.20 Institutional
2.1.2
Sub-
variable
Digital
capacities
Assesses institutional capacities on the
use of digital technologies to facilitate
efficiency and transparency.
0.50
2.1.2.1
Indicator Computer
equipment
The entity has computer equipment for
all personnel performing any type of
administrative work.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no access to computer equipment for any officer at
the entity;
2-3-4 = Access to computer equipment is partial or insufficient;
5 = All officers performing administrative work have access to
computer equipment.
0.20 Institutional
2.1.2.2
Indicator Connectivity
to the
internet
The entity has an internet connection
that offers an adequate bandwidth
for the systems operations and the
personnel.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no access to the internet;
2-3-4 = There is access but its bandwidth is insufficient for the
systems and the personnel;
5 = The bandwidth is optimal for the entity´s activity.
0.20 Institutional
2.1.2.3
Indicator Institutional
website
The institution has its own website and
is capable of managing its content and
services in real time.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The institution does not have a website;
2-3-4 = Does have a website, but its management capacity is
partial;
5 = Has total control.
0.20 Institutional
2.1.2.4
Indicator Information
systems for
infrastructure
projects
The institution has a digital system to
record all information related to public
infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The institution records are on paper;
2 = Some records are electronic;
3 = Records are mainly on spreadsheets, like Excel or others;
5 = All the records are in information systems.
0.10 Institutional
2.1.2.5
Indicator Use of digital
information
systems
Officers use available digital systems for
activities related to public infrastructure
projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = Systems are not used, or there are no systems;
3 = The systems are only partially used;
5 = They are fully used.
0.10 Institutional
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
28
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
2.1.2.6
Indicator Infrastructure
open data
publication
The entity publishes information
of its infrastructure projects in this
format, complying with the following
conditions:
•
tabulated
•
updated
•
complete
•
processable by computer
•
free of payment
•
with a license allowing their free use.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The entity does not publish infrastructure data;
1 = The entity publishes data but only complies with one condition;
2 = Publishes data and comply with two conditions;
3 = Publishes data and complies with three or four conditions;
4 = Publishes data and complies with five conditions;
5 = Publishes infrastructure data complying with all six conditions.
0.10 Institutional
2.1.2.7
Indicator Visualisations
based on
infrastructure
projects data
The public entity uses visualisations
that facilitate the presentation and
interpretation of information referring to
public infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The entity does not publish visualisations on this subject;
3 = Publishes but not regularly;
5 = Publishes visualisations regularly (it can be on the web or other
media such as print).
0.10 Institutional
2.2
Variable Institutional
processes
0.60
2.2.1
Sub-
variable
Procedures
to disclose
information
Evaluates institutional procedures
to guarantee transparency of data
and information related to public
infrastructure.
0.35
2.2.1.1
Indicator Procedures
for the
publication of
information
There is a documented institutional
procedure for the proactive disclosure
of information linked to public
infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no procedure, or the officer does not know if any
exists;
3 = There is a procedure, but the officer only quotes generalities;
5 = The officer knows it, shows it and describes the main elements.
0.20 Institutional
2.2.1.2
Indicator Respons-
ibilities for
disclosure
The procedure for proactive disclosure
refers to named officers who are
responsible for the various stages of
the proactive disclosure of information
process.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The procedure does not name anybody, or nobody exists in
charge of the proactive disclosure;
3 = The procedure names only some people;
5 = The procedure names all people per stage.
0.20 Institutional
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
29
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
2.2.1.3
Indicator Information
officer profile
There is a documented professional
profile in the institution for an
“information officer”, “information
unit”, or similar, that describes the
professional requirements and main
tasks for this person or unit.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no profile or the officer does not know if there is any;
3 = There is a profile, but it has unrelated responsibilities (includes
other activities besides the ones related to public information
access);
5 = There is a profile and all documented responsibilities are related
to it.
0.20 Institutional
2.2.1.4
Indicator Information
officer
There is a person nominated for the
position of information officer and
the person fully complies with the job
profile.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no person assigned, or there is no profile;
3 = There is an assigned person but does not comply with the
profile requirements;
5 = The assigned person complies with all requirements.
0.20 Institutional
2.2.1.5
Indicator Follow-up
mechanisms
on
information
requests
There are procedures to provide
an internal follow-up to public
infrastructure project information
requests that come from citizens or
other actors.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no follow-up mechanism on information requests, or
the officer does not know if one exists;
3 = There is a follow-up mechanism but presents weaknesses that
might result in a lack of response;
5 = There is an internal follow-up mechanism on which no
information request can be lost or unanswered.
0.20 Institutional
2.2.2
Sub-
variable
Enablers
and barriers
to disclose
information
Evaluates conditions at the entity
facilitating or limiting the public
information publication.
0.35
2.2.2.1
Indicator Internal
policy for
information
publication
There is in the entity an internal policy,
issued from the institutional authorities,
for the publication of information
containing, among other data, those
referring to infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no internal standard or policy, or the officer does not
know if any exists;
3 = There is one, but the entity does not fully comply with it;
5 = There is one and the entity fully complies in practice with it.
0.20 Institutional
2.2.2.2
Indicator Disclosure
training
programme
There is an internal disclosure training
programme or dissemination process
that makes personnel aware at all
levels on matters of access to public
information that includes infrastructure
projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no training programme, or the officer does not know
if there is one;
3 = There is a programme but is only applied to some personnel;
5 = There is a programme and is applied to all institutional
personnel.
0.20 Institutional
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
30
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
2.2.2.3
Indicator Identification
of limitations
for publishing
information
The internal limitations to publishing
infrastructure projects information have
been clearly identified.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer does not recognise the existence of limitations;
3 = The officer knows the limitations but does not describe them
adequately;
5 = The officer knows the limitations, describes them and they are
documented, or the officer may prove there are no limitations.
0.15 Institutional
2.2.2.4
Indicator Plan to
mitigate
limitations for
publishing
information
There is a document that contains the
plan to reduce or eliminate the present
limitations to publishing information
related to infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no documented plan to reduce or eliminate the
limitations;
2 = There is a plan but it is not comprehensive and there is no
evidence of its implementation;
3 = There is a non-comprehensive plan but there is evidence of its
implementation;
4 = There is a comprehensive plan but there is no evidence of its
implementation;
5 = There is a comprehensive plan and there is evidence of its
implementation.
0.15 Institutional
2.2.2.5
Indicator Bureaucratic
barriers
to publish
information
The process of proactive and reactive
publication of public information, in
practice, is not hindered by internal
bureaucracy, as for example when it
is necessary to obtain approval from
multiple parties.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The process is highly bureaucratic, or the officer cannot
describe whether this type of problem is present;
3 = It is considered that these obstacles are few;
5 = It is considered there are no bureaucratic obstacles to publish
public information.
0.15 Institutional
2.2.2.6
Indicator Document-
ation of non-
compliance
and sanctions
There is documentation at the entity
acknowledging and following-up
on non-compliance and sanctions
imposed by controlling entities due
to non-compliance with the access-
to-information standards and/or state
contracts.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no documentation, or the officer does not know if
there is some;
2 = There is documentation but no follow-up (of the non-
compliances and/or sanctions), or the follow-up cannot be
described;
3 = There is documentation and follow-up (of the non-compliances
and/or sanctions);
5 = The officer can show from the specific documentation that
they have not received sanctions from controlling entities.
0.15 Institutional
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
31
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
2.2.3
Sub-
variable
Control over
infrastructure
projects
disclosure
Assesses the existence of disclosure
control mechanisms and their practical
impact in improving data disclosure.
0.30
2.2.3.1
Indicator Level of
disclosed
infrastructure
projects
Proportion of projects on which
information is disclosed, complying
with the infrastructure data standard,
compared with the total number of
projects managed by the procuring
entity, expressed as a percentage.
Survey of public
officials and/
or national or
sub-national
websites
0 = 0-10%, or if the officer could not give any numbers;
1 = 11-29%;
2 = 30-49%;
3 = 50-65%;
4 = 66-85%;
5 = 86-100% (approximate calculations according to the available
information).
0.50 Institutional
2.2.3.2
Indicator Level of
investment
represented
by disclosed
infrastructure
projects
Amount of investment represented
by projects on which information is
proactively disclosed by the procuring
entity, complying with the infrastructure
data standard, as a proportion of
the total amount of investment on
infrastructure projects, expressed as a
percentage.
Survey of public
officials and/
or national or
sub-national
websites
0 = 0-10%, or if the officer could not give any numbers;
1 = 11-29%;
2 = 30-49%;
3 = 50-65%;
4 = 66-85%;
5 = 86-100% (approximate calculations according to the available
information).
0.50 Institutional
3 Dimension Citizen
participation
Evaluates the opportunities provided
by procuring entities for citizen
participation and how citizens use the
disclosed public information.
The indicators of this dimension are evaluated “n
e
” times at the
procuring entity level.
0.20 when calculating
the national or sub-
national ITI score
0.25 when calculating
the procuring entity
ITI score
3.1
Variable Participation
practices
1.00
3.1.1
Sub-
variable
Participation
opportunities
Assesses the formalisation of citizens
participation opportunities and
online mechanisms to facilitate this
participation.
0.45
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
32
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
3.1.1.1
Indicator Institution-
alised citizen
participation
The institution has formal citizen
participation opportunities that
allow the procuring entity to listen
and implement requests from the
citizenship, that may be used for public
infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There are no laws, regulations, or policies that can be used as
foundation for citizens participation;
2 = There is only a national or sub-national regulatory framework
for participation, with no internal (institutional) framework;
3 = There are both, external and internal frameworks for
participation;
5 = There are both external and internal frameworks and there are
also efficient documented procedures for citizens’ participation.
0.20 Institutional
3.1.1.2
Indicator Permanent
and inclusive
citizen
participation
The citizens participation opportunities
are permanently available or are
available with a constant periodicity
through a variety of inclusive channels.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There are no formal participation opportunities;
2 = There are participation opportunities, but are not permanent
and are not available through a variety of inclusive channels;
3 = Participation opportunities are either permanent or available
through a variety of inclusive channels;
5 = Participation spaces are both, permanent and available
throughout different participation inclusive channels.
0.10 Institutional
3.1.1.3
Indicator Citizen
participation
in
infrastructure
projects
The entity conducts formal citizen
consultation processes to identify,
define, prioritize and monitor public
infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The entity does not conduct these consultation processes on
infrastructure projects, or the officer is not sure if they do them; 2
= The entity has consultation in infrastructure projects, but is not
for all project stages and is not for all projects;
3 = The entity has consultation in infrastructure projects in all
project stages, but is not applied to all infrastructure projects;
5 = The consultation applies to all infrastructure project stages and
to all infrastructure projects.
0.25 Institutional
3.1.1.4
Indicator Citizen
attention
office
There is in the institution an office for
citizen service (called the Transparency
Office, Complaints Office, Information
Office, etc.) that sees subjects related to
infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no office, or the officer is not sure if there is one;
3 = There is one but it has limitations;
5 = There is one and it serves citizens efficiently.
0.15 Institutional
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
33
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
3.1.1.5
Indicator Online
form for
consultation
or requests
There is an online form by which
any person may request information,
perform a consultation, or present a
complaint referring to an infrastructure
project and receive an effective
response.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The entity does not have an online form, or has one that does
not work;
2 = It has one but has to be downloaded, printed, completed and
scanned or physically taken to the entity;
3 = The entity does have an online form but without a follow-up
mechanisms (such as request identity number);
5 = The online form has a specific follow-up mechanism for the
applicant.
0.10 Institutional
3.1.1.6
Indicator Awareness of
participation
opportunities
The institution makes an effort to
ensure that citizens are aware of existing
participation opportunities and of
the availability of information related
infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The entity does not make any effort, or the officer does not
know if it has;
3 = The entity makes an effort but not in a consistent, permanent
and inclusive manner;
5 = Makes consistent, permanent and inclusive efforts for both
things.
0.20 Institutional
3.1.2
Sub-
variable
Use of
information
by citizens
Assesses the use of information related
to infrastructure projects by citizens,
stemming from case evidence.
0.55
3.1.2.1
Indicator Centralised
citizen
complaints
There is a mechanism that documents
citizens’ complaints related to public
infrastructure projects, generates a log
and manages responses in an orderly
fashion.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no centralisation of citizens’ complaints, or there is no
evidence of its existence;
2 = There is one, but it does not work optimally;
3 = There is one, it works optimally, but it does not generate of a
report with inputs for specific infrastructure projects;
5 = It exists, works optimally and its results are evidenced in a
report for improvements on specific infrastructure projects.
0.10 Institutional
3.3.2.2
Indicator Requests and
responses
of access to
information
Access- to-information requests and
responses there were from the entity are
recorded.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer cannot show how many requests were there, or
there is no record of requests;
3 = The officer can show how many requests and how many
responses were there, but with no specific details;
5 = The officer can show how many of the total responses were
positive (that is, containing the information requested by the
citizens), how many were referred to other agencies (because they
were the wrong agency) and how many requests were about the
same information.
0.10 Institutional
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
34
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
3.3.2.3
Indicator Institutional
response
capacity
The response to citizens’ access-
to-information requests is provided
according to the period established by
law.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no capacity of response in the period established by
law, or there is no control over the response time, or there is no
information about requests;
2 = Only some cases receive response within the period established
by law;
4 = Most cases are responded within the period established by law;
5 = 100% of cases are responded to within the period established
by law.
0.15 Institutional
3.3.2.4
Indicator Institutional
use evidence
The institution provides the public
with feedback, such as reports or
announcements, on how citizens’
inputs have been used in infrastructure
projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There is no feedback made public, or it is not known if there is
internal use of citizens participation;
2 = There is internal use of citizens participation that can be
referenced, but is not well documented;
3 = The is internal use and is documented, but not made public;
5 = The internal documented use of citizens participation in
infrastructure projects is made public.
0.15 Institutional
3.3.2.5
Indicator Citizens use
evidence
The information made public regarding
infrastructure projects is used by the
citizens, civil society organisations,
academia, media, private sector, or any
other actor.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer does not know if there is any type of use;
3 = The officer knows and quotes an example in this present year;
5 = The officer knows and quotes more than one example in this
present year.
0.15 Institutional
3.3.2.6
Indicator Evidence of
joint projects
The institution has developed joint
projects with other actors out of the
institution as a result of the information
on infrastructure projects.
Survey of public
officials
0 = The officer does not know if there has been a joint project;
3 = The officer knows and quotes an example in this present year;
5 = The officer knows and quotes more than an example in this
present year.
0.15 Institutional
3.3.2.7
Indicator Improvements
as a response
to citizen
participation
Changes or reforms have been made
to infrastructure projects in response
to feedback, evaluation, or some other
type of citizen participation.
Survey of public
officials
0 = There are no case, or the officer does not know if there are
any;
3 = There is evidence in a project in this current year;
5 = There is evidence of improvement in more than one project
during this present year.
0.20 Institutional
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
35
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
4 Dimension Information
disclosure
Evaluates the amount of data and
information disclosed by procuring
entities on infrastructure projects
according to the CoST IDS or the
OC4IDS.
The indicators of this dimension are evaluated “n
p
” times at the
infrastructure project level of each of the “n
e” evaluated procuring
entities.
0.35 when calculating
the national or sub-
national ITI score
0.40 when calculating
the procuring entitiy
ITI score
4.1
Variable Disclosure
practices
1.00
4.1.1
Sub-
variable
Project
identification
0.10
4.1.1.1
Indicator Project
reference
number
There is a number or code assigned to
the project that uniquely identifies it.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not available;
3 = It is available, but it changes, or it is not the same in all
registries;
5 = It is always available.
0.075 Institutional
by project
4.1.1.2
Indicator Project owner The entity in charge of project
development and execution contract is
clearly identified.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not available;
5 = It is available.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.1.3
Indicator Sector and
sub-sector
The sector and sub-sector are
identified according to the government
structure, for which the project is being
developed.
Project data on
the web
0 = They are not available;
3 = Only one is available;
5 = Both are available.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.1.4
Indicator Project name The project is clearly identified with
the same name throughout the project
cycle.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not identified;
3 = It is identified but it changes;
5 = It is identified with no changes.
0.075 Institutional
by project
4.1.1.5
Indicator Project
location
The physical location of the project is
clearly identified.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not available;
5 = It is available.
0.15 Institutional
by project
4.1.1.6
Indicator Project
description
The project´s description is available,
indicating what it is about and the
infrastructure outputs that are part of it.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not available;
3 = It is available, but it is insufficient;
5 = It is available, clear and comprehensive.
0.25 Institutional
by project
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
36
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
4.1.1.7
Indicator Purpose There is a project purpose expressed in
terms of public infrastructure and its
intended social and economic impact.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not available;
3 = It is available, but it is insufficient;
5 = It is available, clear and comprehensive.
0.25 Institutional
by project
4.1.2
Sub-
variable
Project
preparation
0.15
4.1.2.1
Indicator Environmental
impact
A document that identifies, evaluates
and describes the environmental
impacts produced by the project on
its surroundings is available; including
reference to relevant additional studies
(soil, topography, hydrogeology, etc.)
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not available;
3 = Only a summary is available;
5 = The document is available, is clear and comprehensive.
0.30 Institutional
by project
4.1.2.2
Indicator Land and
settlement
impact
A document that identifies, assesses
and describes the impacts on human
settlements and population centres,
produced by the project, is available.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not available;
3 = Only a summary is available;
5 = The document is available, is clear and comprehensive.
0.30 Institutional
by project
4.1.2.3
Indicator Contact
details
Information identifies the contact details
of the officer responsible for the project
in the procuring entity.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is impossible to know who is responsible;
2 = Only a few names are available;
3 = All names are available;
5 = Names are available, as well as their contact information.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.2.4
Indicator Project
budget
and date of
approval
The total required budget is available for
the development of the project and the
date of approval provided.
Project data on
the web
0 = They are not available;
3 = Only one of the two is available;
5 = Both are available.
0.20 Institutional
by project
4.1.2.5
Indicator Funding
sources
The sources where the funds are
coming from are identified, e.g. from
the national budget, cooperation,
multilateral organisations, or others.
Project data on
the web
0 = It is not available;
5 = It is available
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3
Sub-
variable
Execution
contract
procurement
0.30
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
37
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
4.1.3.1
Indicator Procuring
entity and
contact
details
The entity in charge of contracting
the execution of the infrastructure
project and its contact details are clearly
identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = They are not identified;
3 = Only one of the two data points is identified;
5 = Both are identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3.2
Indicator Procurement
process
The type of procurement process that
was applied to award the contract is
clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3.3
Indicator Number of
firms bidding
The number of companies participating
in the bidding process for the
infrastructure execution is clearly
identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3.4
Indicator Contract type The type of contract to be signed is
clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3.5
Indicator Contract title The official name of the signed contract
is clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3.6
Indicator Contract price The final amount of the execution
contract is clearly stated.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3.7
Indicator Contract start
date
The date when the contract execution
starts is clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3.8
Indicator Contract
duration
The contract duration is clearly
identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified, either because it is clearly provided or because it
can be calculated with a starting and ending date.
0.10 Institutional
by project
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
38
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
4.1.3.9
Indicator Contractor(s) The
•
name
•
identification number
•
contact information
of the winning contractor is clearly
identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = They are not identified;
2 = Only one of the three data points are identified;
3 = Two of the three data points are identified;
5 = The three data points are identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.3.10
Indicator Contract
scope of work
The description of the work and services
that the firm has to provide under the
signed contract are clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
3 = It is identified but has deficiencies;
5 = It is identified, clear and comprehensive.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4
Sub-
variable
Supervision
contract
procurement
0.20
4.1.4.1
Indicator Procuring
entity and
contact
details
The entity in charge of contracting the
supervision of the infrastructure and its
contact details are clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = They are not identified;
3 = Only one of the two data points is identified;
5 = Both are identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4.2
Indicator Procurement
process
The type of tender management process
applied to award the contract is clearly
identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4.3
Indicator Number
of firms/
individuals
bidding
The number of companies or individuals
participating in the bidding process for
the supervision is clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4.4
Indicator Contract type The type of contract signed is clearly
identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4.5
Indicator Contract title The official name of the signed contract
is clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
39
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
4.1.4.6
Indicator Contract price The final amount of the supervision
contract is clearly provided.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4.7
Indicator Contract start
date
The start date of the supervision
contract started is clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4.8
Indicator Contract
duration
The contract duration is clearly
identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
5 = It is identified, either because it is clearly provided or because it
can be calculated with a starting and ending date.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4.9
Indicator Contract firm/
individual
The name and information of the
awarded company or individual to
implement the project supervision is
clearly identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
3 = Only the name is identified, without all the details;
5 = The name, contact information and professional are identified.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.4.10
Indicator Contract
scope of work
The description of the work and services
that the firm or individual has to provide
under the signed contract are clearly
identified.
Contract data
on the web
0 = It is not identified;
3 = It is identified but has deficiencies;
5 = It is identified, clear and comprehensive.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.5
Sub-
variable
Execution
contract
implement-
ation
0.15
4.1.5.1
Indicator Variation to
contract price
It is clearly indicated whether variations
to the contract price have been made.
Contract data
on the web
0 = The price variations are not pointed out when there is evidence
that they exist, or there is not price information in the contract;
5 = The price variations are clearly pointed out if there is evidence
that they exist, or no price variations could be observed.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.5.2
Indicator Reasons for
price changes
Justifications with arguments why
changes were made to the contract
price are available.
Contract data
on the web
0 = The reasons for price changes are not available and price
changes were observed;
3 = There are reasons for price changes, but they are partial;
5 = The reasons for all changes are available, or no changes to the
contracted price were observed.
0.25 Institutional
by project
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
40
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
4.1.5.3
Indicator Variation
to contract
duration
Contract duration modifications are
clearly indicated, if made.
Contract data
on the web
0 = Variations to the contract duration are not pointed out when
there is evidence that they exist;
5 = Variations are clearly pointed out if there is evidence that they
exist, or no variations to the contract duration could be observed.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.5.4
Indicator Reasons for
contract
duration
changes
Justifications with arguments why
changes were made to the contract
duration are available.
Contract data
on the web
0 = The reasons for changes in the duration are not available and
term changes were observed;
3 = There are reasons for term changes, but they are partial;
5 = The reasons for all changes are available, or no changes to the
contracted term were observed.
0.25 Institutional
by project
4.1.5.5
Indicator Variation
to contract
scope
Modifications to the project scope, if
they exist, are clearly indicated.
Contract data
on the web
0 = Variations to the contract scope are not pointed out when
there is evidence that they exist;
5 = Variations are clearly pointed out if there is evidence that they
exist, or no variations to the contract scope could be observed.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.5.6
Indicator Reasons
for scope
changes
Justifications with arguments why
changes were made to project scope are
available.
Contract data
on the web
0 = The reasons for changes in the project scope are not available
and changes were observed;
3 = There are reasons for scope changes, but they are partial;
5 = The reasons for all changes are available, or no changes to the
contracted scope were observed.
0.20 Institutional
by project
4.1.6
Sub-
variable
Supervision
contract
implement-
ation
0.10
4.1.6.1
Indicator Variation to
contract price
It is clearly indicated whether variations
to the contract price have been made.
Contract data
on the web
0 = The price variations are not pointed out when there is evidence
that they exist, or there is not price information in the contract;
5 = The price variations are clearly pointed out if there is evidence
that they exist, or no price variations could be observed.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.6.2
Indicator Reasons for
price changes
Justifications with arguments why
changes were made to the contract
price are available.
Contract data
on the web
0 = The reasons for price changes are not available and price
changes were observed;
3 = There are reasons for price changes, but they are partial;
5 = The reasons for all changes are available, or no changes to the
contracted price were observed.
0.25 Institutional
by project
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
41
NO. LEVEL NAME DESCRIPTION
INDICATOR
EVALUATION
SOURCE
INDICATOR SCORING SCALE
(0 points = 0, 1 point = 0.2, 2 points = 0.4, 3 points = 0.6, 4
points = 0.8, 5 points = 1) WEIGHTING
INDICATOR
TYPE
4.1.6.3
Indicator Variation
to contract
duration
Contract duration modifications are
clearly pointed out, if made.
Contract data
on the web
0 = Variations to the contract duration are not pointed out when
there is evidence that they exist;
5 = Variations are clearly pointed out if there is evidence that they
exist, or no variations to the contract duration could be observed.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.6.4
Indicator Reasons for
duration
changes
Justifications with arguments why
changes were made to the contract
duration are available.
Contract data
on the web
0 = The reasons for changes in the duration are not available and
duration changes were observed;
3 = There are reasons for term changes, but they are partial;
5 = The reasons for all changes are available, or no changes to the
contracted term were observed.
0.25 Institutional
by project
4.1.6.5
Indicator Variation
to contract
scope
Modifications to the project scope, if
they exist, are clearly pointed out.
Contract data
on the web
0 = Variations to the contract scope are not pointed out when
there is evidence that they exist;
5 = Variations are clearly pointed out if there is evidence that they
exist, or no variations to the contract scope could be observed.
0.10 Institutional
by project
4.1.6.6
Indicator Reasons
for scope
changes
Justifications with arguments why
changes were made to project scope are
available.
Contract data
on the web
0 = The reasons for changes in the project scope are not available
and they were observed;
3 = There are reasons for scope changes, but they are partial;
5 = The reasons for all changes are available, or no changes to the
contracted scope were observed.
0.20 Institutional
by project
Annex 1: Evaluation instrument
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
42
Annex 2: Survey for interview or self-assessment
CoST Infrastructure Transparency Index survey
STATEMENT OF VERACITY OF INFORMATION
The honest and accurate completion of this questionnaire will make an essential contribution to evaluating the CoST
Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI). The ITI is designed to assess the knowledge, procedures, digital capabilities, spaces for
citizen participation and uses that are given to public information, all from the perspective of the procuring entity. The results
of the ITI evaluation serve to clarify where and how transparency in public infrastructure can be improved, with the ultimate
goal of collaboratively increasing the social and economic value of public resources.
To this end, the answers to the questions of this survey must be provided in a truthful, objective and concise manner that
provides information that is up to date, clear and internally consistent. While some questions require reference to be made to
supporting evidence (such as sections of documents, websites, notice boards and newspapers), all require a short description to
elaborate on the response and validate it for subsequent analysis.
The scope of the information and data points referred to in this questionnaire is limited to what is required to be made public
according to applicable national laws and regulations.
For this exercise to be effective, it is necessary for the respondent to express a commitment to answer the questions honestly
and truthfully to achieve the objectives that this instrument promotes. Please help us by providing the following information
and answering the subsequent questions.
The personal information of individual respondents will remain confidential.
Procuring entity name:
Name of the surveyed person:
Position of the surveyed person:
Telephone of the surveyed person:
Email of the surveyed person:
Signature of the surveyed person:
Name of the evaluator:
Signature of the evaluator:
Place and date:
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
43
Variable 2.1: institutional capacities
SUB-VARIABLE 2.1.1: BASIC KNOWLEDGE
1. Do know the national legal framework for access to public information?
( ) Yes
( ) No
1.1. If yes, can you briefly describe what it is for and what it contains?
Scoring for evaluation team:
1 - The officer does not remember its content
2 - Can describe few things
3 - Can describe basic points
4 - Can describe it well
5 - Can clearly specify the essentials of the national legal framework, including what is public, what is proactive and reactive
publication, what is a request for access to information, the guarantor agency and limitations the framework may have
2. Do you know the existence of the national initiative for transparency in the infrastructure sector, also called CoST?
( ) Yes
( ) No
2.1. If yes, can you briefly describe what it is and what characterises it?
Scoring for evaluation team:
1 - The officer does not remember the content of the initiative
2 - Can describe few things
3 - Can describe basic points
4 - Can describe it well
5 - Can clearly specify the essentials of what CoST is, the CoST Infrastructure Data Standard, the formal disclosure
requirements, the multi-stakeholder group, project assurance and citizen audits.
3. Do you know the data standard for infrastructure transparency, also known as CoST Infrastructure Data Standard?
( ) Yes
( ) No
3.1. If yes, can you briefly describe what it is, what characterises it and your entity’s adoption level?
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
44
Scoring for evaluation team:
1 - Does not remember the content or the standard purpose
2 - Can describe few things
3 - Can describe basic points
4 - Can describe it well
5 - Can clearly describe it well (purpose, type of data it contains) and the level of adoption of the entity
4. Do you know the sanctions applied for non-compliance with the access to public information and state contracts laws?
( ) Yes
( ) No
4.1. If yes, can you briefly mention what are the sanctions that apply and why?
Scoring for evaluation team:
2 - The officer can describe few things about the sanctions
3 - Can describe basic points
4 - Can describe them well
5 - Can adequately describe the sanctions and why they apply, or knows that the legal or regulatory frameworks do not
include sanctions (if that was the case)
5. Do you know the differences between: public data, personal data, sensitive data, confidential data and reserved data?
( ) Yes
( ) No
5.1. If yes, can you briefly describe each one of them?
Scoring for evaluation team:
2 - Can describe few things about them
3 - Can describe basic points
4 - Can describe them well
5 - Can clearly describe and differentiate them
SUB-VARIABLE 2.1.2: DIGITAL CAPACITIES
1. Is there in the procuring entity computer equipment for all the personnel who perform some type of administrative work?
( ) There is no access to computer equipment for any officer at the procuring entity
( ) Few officers have computer equipment
( ) About half of officers have computer equipment
( ) Most officers have computer equipment
( ) All the officers who do administrative work have computer equipment
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
45
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no access to computer equipment for any officer at the procuring entity
2 - Few officers have computer equipment
3 - About half of officers have computer equipment
4 - Most officers have computer equipment
5 - All the officers who do administrative work have computer equipment
2. Is there an internet connection in the entity with the optimal bandwidth for digital systems and personnel operations?
( ) There is no internet access
( ) The bandwidth does not allow the personnel to complete their tasks
( ) The bandwidth allows the personnel to complete their tasks, but it is slow
( ) The bandwidth is acceptable to complete personnel tasks
( ) The bandwidth is optimal for all the entity activities (systems and personnel tasks)
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no internet access
2 - The bandwidth does not allow the personnel to complete their tasks
3 - The bandwidth allows the personnel to complete their tasks, but it is slow
4 - The bandwidth is acceptable to complete personnel tasks
5 - The bandwidth is optimal for all the entity activities (systems and personnel tasks)
3. Is there a website in the entity and at least some officers are able to manage its content and can apply changes in real time?
( ) There is no website
( ) There is one, but the entity cannot apply changes
( ) There is one, but the entity depends on third parties to apply changes
( ) There is one and the entity can apply changes internally, but it takes time
( ) There is one and the entity has full control in real time
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no website
2 - There is one, but the entity cannot apply changes
3 - There is one, but the entity depends on third parties to apply changes
4 - There is one and the entity can apply changes internally, but it takes time
5 - There is one and the entity has full control in real time
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
46
4. Is there a digital information system or platform to record all information regarding public infrastructure projects?
( ) Records are kept on paper
( ) Some records are digital
( ) Records are predominantly on spreadsheets, like Excel or others
( ) All records are on information systems
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - Records are kept on paper
2 - Some records are digital
3 - Records are predominantly on spreadsheets, like Excel or others
5 - All records are on information systems
5. Do the government officers at the entity use the available digital systems for activities related to public infrastructure projects?
( ) Systems are not used, or there are no systems whatsoever
( ) They are only partially used
( ) They are fully used
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - Systems are not used, or there are no systems whatsoever
3 - They are only partially used
5 - They are fully used
6. Does the entity publish infrastructure projects information as open data?
( ) Yes
( ) No
6.1. If yes, does the infrastructure projects information meet all the following conditions: tabulated, updated, complete,
processable by computer, free of payment and with a license allowing its free use.
( ) Published projects data only complies with one condition
( ) Published projects data complies with two conditions
( ) Published projects data complies with three or four conditions
( ) Published projects data complies with five conditions
( ) Published projects data complies with all six conditions
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
47
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
1 - Published projects data only complies with one condition
2 - Published projects data complies with two conditions
3 - Published projects data complies with three or four conditions
4 - Published projects data complies with five conditions
5 - Published projects data complies with all six conditions
7. Does the entity publish visualisations, on the website or other media (for example physical), that can graphically facilitate
the presentation and interpretation, by citizens, of the infrastructure projects information?
( ) No visualisations on this subject are published
( ) Visualisations are published, but not in a regular manner (either on the web or other media)
( ) Visualisations are published in a regular manner (either on the web or other media)
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - No visualisations on this subject are published
3 - Visualisations are published, but not in a regular manner (either on the web or other media)
5 - Visualisations are published in a regular manner (either on the web or other media)
Variable 2.2: institutional processes
SUB-VARIABLE 2.2.1: PROCEDURES TO DISCLOSE INFORMATION
1. Is there an internal documented procedure for the proactive disclosure of information linked to public infrastructure projects?
( ) Yes
( ) No
If yes, can you describe it and share a copy of it?
Scoring for evaluation team:
3 - There is a procedure but the officer only refers to generalities
5 - There is a procedure, the officer describes its main elements and shares it
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
48
2. Do you have with the procedure the names of the officers who are responsible for the different stages of the proactive
disclosure of information?
( ) The procedure does not name anybody, or nobody is in charge of proactive publication
( ) The procedure names only some people
( ) The procedure names all the people per stage
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - The procedure does not name anybody, or nobody is in charge of proactive publication
3 - The procedure names only some people
5 - The procedure names all the people per stage
3. Is there a documented professional profile in the entity for an “information officer”, “information unit”, or similar title, that
describes the professional requirements and main tasks of this person/unit?
( ) There is no profile or you do not know if one exists
( ) The profile exists but it has unrelated responsibilities (this are other activities besides the ones related to public
information access))
( ) The profile exists and all documented responsibilities are related to it
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no profile or you do not know if one exists
3 - The profile exists but it has unrelated responsibilities (this are other activities besides the ones related to public
information access)
5 - The profile exists and all documented responsibilities are related to it
4. Is there a person assigned for the position of information officer and the person fully complies with the profile conditions?
( ) There is no person assigned to the position, or the profile or position does not exist
( ) There is a person assigned but does not comply with the profile requirements
( ) The assigned person complies with all requirements
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no person assigned to the position, or the profile or position does not exist
3 - There is a person assigned but does not comply with the profile requirements
5 - The assigned person complies with all requirements
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
49
5. Is there a procedure to internally follow-up information requests from citizens or other actors related to public infrastructure
projects?
( ) There is no follow-up mechanism on information requests, or you do not know if one exists
( ) There is a mechanism but presents weaknesses that might result in a lack of response
( ) There is a mechanism on which no information request can be lost or unanswered.
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no follow-up mechanism on information requests, or you do not know if one exists
3 - There is a mechanism but presents weaknesses that might result in a lack of response
5 - There is a mechanism on which no information request can be lost or unanswered.
SUB-VARIABLE 2.2.2: ENABLERS AND BARRIERS TO DISCLOSE INFORMATION
1. Is there an internal policy issued from the entity’s high authorities for the publication of information containing, among
other data, public infrastructure projects?
( ) There is no internal norm or policy or you do not know if one exists
( ) There is one but it is not fully complied in practice
( ) There is one and it is fully complied in practice
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no internal norm or policy or you do not know if one exists
3 - There is one but it is not fully complied in practice
5 - There is one and it is fully complied in practice
2. Is there is an internal disclosure training programme or dissemination process that makes the personnel aware at all levels
on matters of access to public information, that includes infrastructure projects?
( ) There is no training programme or you do not know if one exists
( ) There is one but it is only applied to a part of the personnel
( ) There is one and it is applied to all the entity’s personnel
Description/evidence:
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
50
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no training programme or you do not know if one exists
3 - There is one but it is only applied to a part of the personnel
5 - There is one and it is applied to all the entity’s personnel
3. Are there internal limitations to publish the information related to public infrastructure projects?
( ) Yes
( ) No
If yes, can you describe them and provide documental evidence?
If no, can you describe why and/or provide evidence?
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - The officer does not recognise the existence of limitations; or not evidence can be provided if no limitations are identified
3 - The officer recognises the limitations, but does not describe them adequately
5 - The officer knows the limitations, describes them and provides a document with them; or the officer can provide evidence
that there are no limitations
4. Is there a document that contains a plan to reduce or eliminate the present limitations to publish infrastructure projects
information?
( ) There is no document with a mitigation plan
( ) There is a plan but it is not comprehensive and there is no evidence of its implementation
( ) There is a non-comprehensive plan but there is evidence of its implementation
( ) There is a comprehensive plan but there is no evidence of its implementation
( ) There is a comprehensive plan and there is evidence of its implementation
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no document with a mitigation plan
2 - There is a plan but it is not comprehensive and there is no evidence of its implementation
3 - There is a non-comprehensive plan but there is evidence of its implementation
4 - There is a comprehensive plan but there is no evidence of its implementation
5 - There is a comprehensive plan and there is evidence of its implementation
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
51
5. Does the process of proactive and reactive publication become slow or hinders because of internal bureaucracy, as for
example, obtaining several approvals from different bosses?
( ) The process is highly bureaucratic or you do not know if it has this type of problems
( ) The bureaucratic obstacles are very few
( ) There are no bureaucratic obstacles to publish public information
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - The process is highly bureaucratic or you do not know if it has this type of problems
3 - The bureaucratic obstacles are very few
5 - There are no bureaucratic obstacles to publish public information
6. Is there some type of documentation at the entity acknowledging and following-up to non-compliances and sanctions
dictated by controlling entities, due to non-compliance with the access-to-information law and/or state contracts? Has the
procuring entity received any sanctions from controlling entities?
( ) There is no documentation or you do not know if there is some
( ) There is documentation but no follow-up (of the non-compliances and/or sanctions) or you do not know if there is
follow-up
( ) There is documentation and follow-up (of the non-compliances and/or sanctions)
( ) The specific documentation at the procuring entity proves the entity has not received sanctions from controlling entities
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no documentation or you do not know if there is some
2 - There is documentation but no follow-up (of the non-compliances and/or sanctions) or you do not know if there is follow-
up
3 - There is documentation and follow-up (of the non-compliances and/or sanctions)
5 - The specific documentation at the procuring entity proves the entity has not received sanctions from controlling entities
SUB-VARIABLE 2.2.3: CONTROL OVER INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS DISCLOSURE
1. How many public infrastructure projects are managed by the entity in this year and in the previous year? (If the exact
number is not known a precise approximation is valid)
This year:
Previous year:
( ) You cannot approximate a number
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
52
1.1. How many of those projects disclosed information according to the infrastructure data standard (based on CoST IDS or OC4IDS)?
This year:
Previous year:
( ) You cannot approximate a number or you do not know the data standard
Description/evidence:
Scoring for the evaluation team:
0 – 0−10%, or if the officer could not give any numbers
1 – 11−29%
2 – 30−49%
3 – 50−65%
4 – 66−85%
5 – 86−100%
(approximate calculations according to the available information)
2. What is the investment amount for infrastructure projects managed by the entity in this year and in the previous year? (If
the exact number is not known a precise approximation is valid)
This year:
Previous year:
( ) You cannot approximate a number
2.1. What is the investment amount of those projects in which information is disclosed according to the infrastructure data
standard (based on CoST IDS or OC4IDS)?
This year:
Previous year:
( ) You cannot approximate a number or you do not know the data standard
Description/evidence:
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
53
Scoring for the evaluation team:
0 – 0−10%, or if the officer could not give any numbers
1 – 11−29%
2 – 30−49%
3 – 50−65%
4 – 66−85%
5 – 86−100%
(approximate calculations according to the available information)
Variable 3.1 citizen participation
SUB-VARIABLE 3.1.1: PARTICIPATION OPPORTUNITIES
1. Does the entity have formal citizens participation opportunities that allow to listen and implement requests from the
citizens, that may be used for public infrastructure projects?
( ) There are no laws, regulations, or policies that can be used as foundation for citizens participation
( ) There is only a national or sub-national legal or regulatory framework for participation, with no internal (institutional)
normative framework
( ) There are both, national or sub-national, as well as internal normative frameworks
( ) There are both normative frameworks and there are also efficient documented procedures for citizens participation
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There are no laws, regulations, or policies that can be used as foundation for citizens participation
2 - There is only a national or sub-national legal or regulatory framework for participation, with no internal (institutional)
normative framework
3 - There are both, national or sub-national, as well as internal normative frameworks
5 - There are both normative frameworks and there are also efficient documented procedures for citizens participation
2. Are citizens participation opportunities permanently available or available with a constant periodicity through a variety of
inclusive channels?
( ) There are no formal participation opportunities
( ) There are participation opportunities, but are not permanent/periodic and are not available through a variety of inclusive
channels
( ) Participation opportunities are either permanent/periodic or available through a variety of inclusive channels
( ) Participation spaces are both, permanent/periodic and available throughout different participation inclusive channels
Description/evidence:
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
54
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There are no formal participation opportunities
2 - There are participation opportunities, but are not permanent/periodic and are not available through a variety of inclusive
channels
3 - Participation opportunities are either permanent/periodic or available through a variety of inclusive channels
5 - Participation spaces are both, permanent/periodic and available throughout different participation inclusive channels
3. Does the entity conduct formal citizens consultation processes to identify, define, prioritize and monitor public infrastructure
projects?
( ) The entity does not conduct these consultation processes on infrastructure projects or you do not know if they take place
( ) The entity has consultation in infrastructure projects but is not for all project stages and is not for all projects
( ) The entity has consultation in infrastructure projects in all project stages, but is not applied to all infrastructure projects
( ) The consultation applies to all infrastructure project stages and to all infrastructure projects
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - The entity does not conduct these consultation processes on infrastructure projects or you do not know if they take place
2 - The entity has consultation in infrastructure projects but is not for all project stages and is not for all projects
3 - The entity has consultation in infrastructure projects in all project stages, but is not applied to all infrastructure projects
5 - The consultation applies to all infrastructure project stages and to all infrastructure projects
4. Is there in the entity a citizen service office (that may be called Transparency Office, Complaints Office, Information Office,
etc.) that sees subjects related to the infrastructure projects?
( ) There is no office or you do not know if there is one
( ) There is one but has limitations to do its job
( ) There is one and efficiently attends the citizens
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no office or you do not know if there is one
3 - There is one but has limitations to do its job
5 - There is one and efficiently attends the citizens
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
55
5. Is there an online form through which any person may request information, ask questions, or present a complaint referring
to an infrastructure project and receive an effective response?
( ) There is no online form, or there is one but it does not work
( ) There is one but has to be downloaded, printed, completed, scanned and submitted or physically taken to the entity
( ) There is one, but it has no follow-up mechanism (this mechanism allows the applicant to later identify his/her request,
such as a request ID number)
( ) There is one and has a specific follow-up mechanism for the applicant
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no online form, or there is one but it does not work
2 - There is one but has to be downloaded, printed, completed, scanned and submitted or physically taken to the entity
3 - There is one, but it has no follow-up mechanism (this mechanism allows the applicant to later identify his/her request, such
as a request ID number)
5 - There is one and has a specific follow-up mechanism for the applicant
6. Does the entity conduct some type of effort for the citizens to know the existing participation opportunities and the
availability of information related to infrastructure projects?
( ) There is no effort or you do not know if any effort is made
( ) There are efforts, but they are not consistent, permanent and inclusive
( ) There are consistent, permanent and inclusive efforts for both things (the publicity of citizens’ participation spaces and
infrastructure projects information)
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no effort or you do not know if any effort is made
3 - There are efforts, but they are not consistent, permanent and inclusive
5 - There are consistent, permanent and inclusive efforts for both things (the publicity of citizens’ participation spaces and
infrastructure projects information)
SUB-VARIABLE 3.1.2: USE OF INFORMATION BY CITIZENS
1. Is there a mechanism that documents citizens’ complaints referring to public infrastructure projects, generates a log and
manages responses in an orderly fashion?
( ) There is no centralisation of citizens’ complaints, or there is no evidence of its existence
( ) There is one, but it does not work optimally
( ) There is one, it works optimally, but it does not generate a report with inputs for specific infrastructure projects
( ) There is one, works optimally and its results are evidenced in a report for improvements on specific infrastructure projects
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
56
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no centralisation of citizens’ complaints, or there is no evidence of its existence
2 - There is one, but it does not work optimally
3 - There is one, it works optimally, but it does not generate a report with inputs for specific infrastructure projects
5 - There is one, works optimally and its results are evidenced in a report for improvements on specific infrastructure projects
2. Can you show how many accesses to information requests are there, how many responses were positive (that is, containing
the information requested by the citizens), how many were referred to other agencies (because they were the wrong agency)
and how many requests were about the same information?
( ) You cannot show how many requests are there, or there is no record of requests
( ) You can show how many requests and how many responses are there, but with no specific details
( ) You can show how many of the total responses were positive, how many were referred to other agencies and how many
requests were about the same information.
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - You cannot show how many requests are there, or there is no record of requests
3 - You can show how many requests and how many responses are there, but with no specific details
5 - You can show how many of the total responses were positive, how many were referred to other agencies and how many
requests were about the same information.
3. Are the responses to citizens information requests provided according to the period established by law?
( ) There is no capacity to answer within the period stablished by law, or there is no control over the response time, or there
is no information about requests
( ) Only some cases receive response within the period established by law
( ) Most cases are responded to within the period established by law
( ) 100% of cases are responded to within the period established by law
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no capacity to answer within the period stablished by law, or there is no control over the response time, or there is
no information about requests
2 - Only some cases receive response within the period established by law
4 - Most cases are responded to within the period established by law
5 - 100% of cases are responded to within the period established by law
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
57
4. Does the entity provide the public with feedback, such as reports or announcements, on how citizens’ inputs have been
used in infrastructure projects?
( ) There is no feedback made public, or it is not known if there is internal use of citizens participation
( ) There is internal use of citizens participation that can be referenced, but is not well documented
( ) There is internal use and it is documented, but not made public
( ) The internal documented use of citizens participation in infrastructure projects is made public
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no feedback made public, or it is not known if there is internal use of citizens participation
2 - There is internal use of citizens participation that can be referenced, but is not well documented
3 - The is internal use and is documented, but not made public
5 - The internal documented use of citizens participation in infrastructure projects is made public
5. Do you know if the information made public about infrastructure projects is used somehow by citizens, civil society
organisations, academia, media, private sector, or any other actor?
( ) You do not know if there is any type of use
( ) You know and can describe an example in the current year
( ) You know and can describe more than one example in the current year
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - You do not know if there is any type of use
3 - You know and can describe an example in the current year
5 - You know and can describe more than one example in the current year
6. Do you know if the entity has developed joint projects (this is when the project design and implementation are executed
with shared responsibilities) with other actors different from the entity, using infrastructure projects information?
( ) You do not know if there has been a joint project
( ) You know and can describe an example in the current year
( ) You know and can describe more than one example in the current year
Description/evidence:
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
58
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - You do not know if there is any type of use
3 - You know and can describe an example in the current year
5 - You know and can describe more than one example in the current year
7. Is there evidence of changes or reforms that have been made in infrastructure projects as response to feedback, evaluation,
or some other type of citizens’ participation?
( ) There is no case or you do not know if there is any
( ) There is evidence of improvements in one project in this current year
( ) There is evidence of improvements in more than one project in this current year
Description/evidence:
Scoring for evaluation team:
0 - There is no case or you do not know if there is any
3 - There is evidence of improvements in one project in this current year
5 - There is evidence of improvements in more than one project in this current year
Annex 2: Survey for interview
or self-assessment
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
59
Annex 3: Procuring entities selection method and criteria
It is recommended to use a stratified random method to select the procuring entities that will be part of the sample for
evaluation. The method and criteria that have been applied during a Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI) evaluation must to
be published along with the reports for the transparency and consistency of the process. A simplified example of this method
can be seen below.
This table shows the procuring entities selected during the ITI test in Honduras. To define this procuring entities sample, the
following process was applied:
1. A full list of the national procuring entities was conducted, including information such as budget size, type and sector.
2. The different types of procuring entities were sorted in three main categories: ministries and state secretaries, municipalities
and autonomous agencies (including autonomous, semi-autonomous, public companies and similar types of entities).
3. Three sub-groups were made based on the above distribution and the procuring entities were sorted based on their budget
size from the biggest to the smallest.
4. Randomly, without knowing the name of the procuring entities, a shorter list of them were selected by including procuring
entities with high, medium and low budget size. More emphasis was given to selecting more entities with bigger budgets
since this criterion was considered as an indicator of social and economic impact.
5. The names were uncovered and a short list of procuring entities for testing the ITI was defined.
TYPE BUDGET PROCURING ENTITY NAME
Autonomous 33,499,973,007 Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica (ENEE)
Autonomous 5,212,678,239 Inversión Estratégica de Honduras (INVEST-H)
Autonomous 4,916,695,586 Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras (UNAH)
Autonomous 1,165,347,444 Empresa Nacional Portuaria (ENP)
Autonomous 66,292,886 Comisión Nacional de Vivienda y Asentamientos Humanos de Honduras (CONVIVIENDA)
Autonomous 43,127,176 Dirección Nacional de Parques y Recreación (DNPR)
Ministry 29,905,852,087 Secretaría de Educación (SEDUC)
Ministry 14,741,983,690 Secretaría de Salud (SESAL)
Ministry 5,044,826,623 Secretaría de Infraestructura y Servicios Públicos (INSEP)
Ministry 2,027,484,384 Secretaría de Agricultura y Ganadería (SAG)
Ministry 1,094,655,999 Secretaría de Desarrollo e Inclusion Social (SEDIS)
Ministry 49,939,633 Secretaría de Estado en los Despachos de Desarrollo Comunitario, Agua y Saneamiento
(SEDECOAS)
Municipality 5,390,365,117 Alcaldía Municipal de San Pedro Sula
Municipality 5,361,342,393 Alcaldía Municipal del Distrito Central (AMDC)
Municipality 719,282,396 Alcaldía Municipal de Puerto Cortés
Municipality 478,500,000 Alcaldía Municipal de El Progreso
Municipality 165,454,024 Alcaldía Municipal de Choluteca
Annex 3: Procuring entities selection
method and criteria
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
60
Annex 4: Guidance for the evaluation team training
The following guidance is a recommendation for how the training of a Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI) evaluation team
can be conducted, based on the experience of the trials conducted in Guatemala and Honduras. A minimum of three days of
training should be provided. The following is based on those three days, but can be readily be elaborated with further detail.
Considerations before initiating
■ Evaluators were selected before the training and had sufficient time to allow them to make arrangements related to their
short but full-time dedication during the evaluation.
■ The selected evaluators already had experience of CoST’s principles and approach. In addition, they had experience in the
use of centralised government portals that contain the data and information required for the evaluation such as those
related to tender management, transparency, budgeting, financial management and investment.
■ The training materials were prepared before the training. These included PowerPoint presentations, handouts and
worksheets.
DAY 1
■ Welcome and introduction.
■ Presentation of the evaluation team.
■ Concepts, relevance and objectives.
■ Elaboration process.
■ Principles, norms and guiding processes.
■ Structure and introduction to the dimensions.
■ Rules for evaluating each dimension.
■ Data processing and scoring system.
■ In-depth study of dimension 1:
● variables, sub-variables and indicators
● indicators and their scoring scales, with the use of examples
● data collection method for the indicators of the dimension.
Annex 4: Guidance for the
evaluation team training
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
61
DAY 2
■ In-depth study of dimension 2:
● variables, sub-variables and indicators
● indicators and their scoring scales, with the use of examples
● data collection method for the indicators of the dimension.
■ In-depth study of dimension 3:
● variables, sub-variables and indicators
● indicators and their scoring scales, with the use of examples
● data collection method for the indicators of the dimension.
■ Desktop research to practise dimension 1 with feedback.
DAY 3
■ Desktop research to practise dimension 4 evaluation with feedback. A specific infrastructure project, not included in the
evaluation, was previously selected for practise.
■ Discussion and response definition for complex scenarios while collecting data through the survey, either by interview or
self-assessment.
■ Evaluation team role definition (first, second and third evaluators).
■ Review of procuring entities sample.
■ Review of procuring entities infrastructure projects to be evaluated.
■ Protocol for data collection.
■ Logistics for data collection and incident protocol.
During the data collection, questions and incidents may occur. The evaluation team, along with CoST staff, need to discuss them
to find the best solution and a standard process to follow whenever is appropriate.
After the data collection, the evaluation team should together evaluate the process to make improvements for the next ITI
evaluation and document the experiences in a report with the lessons learned and recommendations. The evaluation team
should evaluate:
■ the training
■ the data collection experience
■ the processing and reporting
■ the protocols and logistics.
Annex 4: Guidance for the
evaluation team training
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
62
Annex 5: Guide on lessons learned and techniques for an ITI implementation
From test implementations conducted in different countries and other accumulated experience, the following points
describe lessons learned and recommendations for any CoST national or sub-national or member interested in implementing
the Infrastructure Transparency Index (ITI). It provides additional information for decisions during an ITI implementation,
particularly on topics that may become complex or sensitive.
1. Preparation stage
1.1 EVALUATION TEAM
1.1.1 Evaluators’ profile: the people to be selected for the data collection process should have experience on CoST’s principles
and approach and should understand the data points of the CoST Infrastructure Data Standard (IDS) and/or the Open
Contracting for Infrastructure Data Standard (OC4IDS). They need to have experience using the government information
platforms that contain the information required for the evaluation, such as procurement, transparency, financial,
investment, legal framework and others; and should have experience on conducting interviews in the public sector.
■ Third evaluator: the person who performs this role is someone who is careful with data and details and has a deep
understanding of the ITI instrument, clearly understanding all its indicators and the sources from where the data is
collected. The third evaluator has a high responsibility on quality assurance because of his/her role in resolving any
differences of opinion between the other evaluators.
1.1.2 Coordination profile: to conduct an ITI evaluation is necessary to have someone responsible of administrative
arrangements, project management, implementation methodology, training, quality control, data processing and final
reports. This implies that the person selected for the coordination requires to have a deep understanding of the ITI, its
components and its implementation process, as well as experience in leading similar evaluation studies.
1.2 TIME CONCERNS
1.2.1 It is important to consider the different implementation phases and their time requirements to plan properly, the
following points present some time definitions for consideration.
■ The administrative arrangements related to the ITI evaluation need to be taken in consideration. Depending on the
contractual or partnership arrangements, these administrative processes will take more or less time. It is necessary to
include this time to the total project implementation period.
■ The evaluation team should be appointed sufficiently early in the process to allow them to make preparations related
to their short but full-time dedication during the evaluation. The training days and the evaluation initiation need to be
scheduled and informed to the evaluation team for them to get prepared.
■ There is a recommendation to dedicate a minimum of three days to conduct the evaluation team training. The
recommendations for the training are available in Annex 4.
■ The total evaluation time, this is for the data collection process, will depend on the number of procuring entities
and projects to evaluate, as well as the number of evaluators. But when following the basic recommendation of two
infrastructure projects per procuring entity and at least three evaluators, a half-day can be provisionally allowed for
evaluation of each procuring entity. This means that 20 procuring entities, for example, will be evaluated in 10 days.
■ After that, data can be processed in less than a week and will be ready to prepare the reports and the database to be
published. A general consideration of 3 weeks should be enough to prepare these outputs and to be ready for the results
presentation event.
Annex 5: Guide on lessons learned and
techniques for an ITI implementation
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
63
1.3 TRAINING
1.3.1 Time and content: the training time has to be sufficient to allow the evaluation team to understand the instrument and
evaluation indicators, to practice real cases using the instrument and to discuss different scenarios and complexities that
might occur in the evaluation process. Even for people familiar with the topics, three days would be the minimum time
investment. The recommendations on how to structure the training are available in Annex 4.
1.4 SELECTION OF PROCURING ENTITIES
1.4.1 Criteria: when selecting the specific procuring entities, besides the recommended criteria (procuring entity type,
infrastructure budget and projects’ social and economic impact), other things can be considered, such as corruption
history, social complaints and more representation from specific categories of the general public sector. In all conditions,
the criteria have to be the same for all procuring entities and have to be published in the final reports.
1.4.2 Location: if the evaluation requires interviews, there is a need to consider the necessary budget and time to reach to
procuring entities that might be far from the evaluation team’s base. Such investment is necessary because possibility of a
procuring entity being selected for evaluation should not be unduly constrained as a result of its location.
1.5 SELECTION OF PROJECTS
1.5.1 Access to information related to the procuring entities infrastructure projects: it is critical to have information about all
the infrastructure projects for which a procuring entity is responsible to be able to select the ones that will be included
in the evaluation. This information can be available in a centralised government authority or in each procuring entity. If
having the full list of projects with information by procuring entities cannot be achieved, making an effort to compile the
fullest possible list of projects by procuring entities prior the evaluation is necessary for an objective project selection.
1.5.2 Avoid bias in the selection criteria: it is important to be careful with limiting the selection of projects to those whose
implementation and supervision contracts, for example, are published in the electronic procurement system (if there is one
available). The use of this type of criterion will force the selection of only transparent projects and this will significantly
bias the final results. In contrast, once the list of projects is identified, two completed projects can be selected from the list
(one on the basis of relevance and the other randomly), without checking whether they have published information. The
projects should be selected and later evaluated based on the available information, whether there is little or much data is
available. This means that the amount of information available must not affect the project selection.
1.5.3 Completed projects: it is a precondition for the ITI that the projects considered for evaluation must be at the completed
stage. This allows their full evaluation throughout the different ITI indicators. If a project is not completed, the
information required for its evaluation will not exist and this will significantly affect the final results. For this reason, only
completed infrastructure projects can be evaluated. If the ITI evaluations are conducted annually, this precondition can be
tuned, for example, by only considering projects that were completed in the previous year.
2. Evaluation and processing stages
2.1 COORDINATION WITH PROCURING ENTITIES
2.1.1 Contact information: since it is recognised that about half of the information to conduct an evaluation has to be collected
from the access-to-information unit of the procuring entity (or the equivalent, as defined in the applicable national
regulation), having the contact information of public officials at these units can accelerate and facilitate the coordination
and data collection.
2.1.2 Preparation: during the preparation and prior the evaluation, it is necessary to submit a formal letter to all procuring
entities, directed to the access-to-information unit, to inform them about the ITI project and the information
requirements. If the interviews will be conducted, it is necessary to schedule all the meetings before the evaluation starts
to make sure all interviews are conducted during the evaluation period.
Annex 5: Guide on lessons learned and
techniques for an ITI implementation
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
64
2.1.3 Standardised communications: since procuring entities will be evaluated and compared (which is an essential part of the
ITI), it is necessary to have formal and standard communications with procuring entities to make sure no one receives
preferential treatment that may influence the results in some way.
2.2 BUY-IN FROM PROCURING ENTITIES
2.2.1 Build a collaboration relationship with procuring entities: it is recognised that to conduct an ITI evaluation, there is
an important need for cooperation from the procuring entities. They are required to respond to the survey (either
by interview or self-assessment) and to provide justifications and evidence to all the survey questions. The access-to-
information officer of the procuring entity (or the person performing in the similar role) will need to allocate time within
a specific timeframe to support the ITI. These are some recommendations to get a buy-in from the procuring entities and
particular, from the access-to-information officer.
■ Identify the right person: there might be cases where the access-to-information officer of the procuring entity is not
clearly defined. In such situations, it will be necessary to call the procuring entity and ask who is the person that internally
performs this role. Once the person is identified, it is necessary to collect their contact information.
■ Assign one specific evaluator to each procuring entity: To build a communication channel and a trust relation with the ITI
process, a specific evaluator should take care of the relations with each procuring entity. This will require the procuring
entities to be distributed among the evaluation team and that each evaluator assumes the responsibility for data collection
with that specific procuring entity.
■ Hold a one-to-one conversation with the access-to-information officer: as part of the conversation, it is necessary to
introduce the ITI, its evaluation process, its outcomes and, specially, its benefits to the procuring entity. It is also important
to confirm the will from the government officer to collaborate with the ITI and to answer any question that may limit the
response from the procuring entity. Some of the key benefits that can be mentioned during the conversation are:
● visibility of the access-to-information unit day-to-day role and needs
● institutional awareness about the strengths and weaknesses related to public infrastructure transparency and management
● custom guidance for the procuring entity on how to build capacities to strengthen transparency and management on
infrastructure projects
● support over the time to respond to questions and training needs related to the ITI
● development of a collaborative agenda, among stakeholders and at the national or sub-national scale, to raise transparency and
accountability standards.
■ After these actions, it is recommended to follow the process described in Chapter 3 paragraph 3.2.5 (Recommendations
about working with procuring entities).
2.2.2 Draw on the access to public information legal framework: This approach can be used as a complement to the
collaboration relationship approach, or as an alternative to it, when the procuring entities do not want to collaborate
with the ITI. The law or regulation on access to information will allow the evaluation team formally to request the data
required for the ITI, drawing upon the right to public information. The national or sub-national conditions, as well as
the response from the procuring entities, should be evaluated by the evaluation team to define the best combination of
actions to obtain the support from the procuring entities.
2.3 INTERVIEWS
2.3.1 Flexibility to select the data collection method: an evaluation team may conclude that an interview, rather than self-
assessment, is the appropriate method in their location. This might be, for example, because of distrust generated by
corruption, the high number of government officers sanctioned on related issues or the high possibility of reluctance from
government officers. But in contrast, another evaluation team in other location may conclude that self-assessment, rather
than interview, offers them better results because they can reach a higher number of procuring entities and government
officers at the procuring entities are likely to cooperate completing the self-assessment in the given time. For this reason,
Annex 5: Guide on lessons learned and
techniques for an ITI implementation
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
65
this ITI manual does not recommend one option over the other. Rather, it invites the evaluation team to analyse the pros
and cons of the two methods based on their conditions to select the most appropriate one.
2.3.2 Approach to government officers: the approach to the government officers at the access-to- information units has to be
positive, formal, standardised and make reference to the access-to- information law and any other relevant regulation.
It is important to show to the officers the benefits to their day-to-day work, to the procuring entity and to citizens that
would come from the ITI results. An empathetic and purposeful attitude is key to generating reliable communication with
these officers and would increase the chances of receiving information that reveals the challenges faced by the procuring
entities and the general contribution generated by the ITI.
2.4 SELF-ASSESSMENT
2.4.1 Protocol for data collection: it can be anticipated that having a government officer at each selected procuring entity
formally responding to the self-assessment over a specific period of time is a big challenge. For this reason, any evaluation
team selecting this data collection method needs to design a protocol with the characteristics that best match to the local
conditions. A recommended example of a protocol is included in Chapter 3 paragraph 3.2.5 (Recommendations about
working with procuring entities).
2.4.2 Approach to government officers: as mentioned in the interview method, the approach to contacting government officers
at the access-to-information units for self-assessment also has to be positive, formal, standardised and reference the
access-to-information law.
2.5 EVALUATION OF WEBSITES
2.5.1 Experience: it is essential for the evaluation team to have experience using websites where the information for evaluation
is available. Sometimes, the data is published but it is not easy to find. Hence, in order to conduct the evaluation, the
evaluation team members need to be able to know where the data is. Though it is public information, it is also technical
and sometimes only available within complex documents. The evaluation team must have experience searching for such
information.
2.5.2 Balance on the depth of search: a balance needs to be defined with the evaluation team before conducting the
evaluation, because reading a full document with several hundreds of pages to find one specific data point is not feasible
or realistic. A recommendation on this regard is that only recognised and key documents, not all them, should be opened
and searched to determine whether data points are available.
2.5.3 Private access: at the beginning of the evaluation a question may arise as to whether private access to some government
websites is required. The appropriate response depends on the purpose of that access. Because if the purpose is to
evaluate whether the procuring entity has published data about the infrastructure projects, then no private access is
justified because the ITI only evaluates public data that any normal citizen should be able to see. On the other hand, if
the purpose of the private access is to contribute to the preparation of the evaluation, such as collecting information for
project selection (as mentioned in Annex 5 paragraph 1.5.1), then the access is valid for the ITI. This means that if the
private access is requested to evaluate ITI indicators, then is not valid for the ITI; but if the access is requested to make
preparations and design decisions, then it is valid.
Annex 5: Guide on lessons learned and
techniques for an ITI implementation
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
66
3 Reporting stage
3.1 RESULTS PRESENTATION
3.1.1 Formal results presentation: there will be an important contribution to the national or local context if the ITI results are
shared with everyone. Publishing the final report and making it and the results database available for download will
always be required. Moreover, a periodic event with multiple stakeholders can be formally established each time the
results and key findings are ready to release, where the procuring entities that won the first places of the ranking can also
be recognised and acknowledged because of their good practices.
3.1.2 Press: there should be a press strategy for publicising the ITI results. A press release should be issued the day the results are
published, and further press releases on specific aspects of the ITI results should be issued in the course of the following
weeks to keep the topic in the public eye.
3.1.3 Social media: the results should also be promoted on social media, with key findings and links to the reports and data.
3.2 AFTER RESULTS
3.2.1 Response to questions: once the results are released, it is normal to have questions from the procuring entities and some
other stakeholders about the results and about what is evaluated by the ITI. They will want to understand the indicators
where they have doubts. So, it is necessary to have a basic internal structure to be able to respond to these questions and
eventually to assist with meetings.
3.2.2 Procuring entity training: procuring entities may request training to improve their performance on the ITI. This is very
positive and will require efforts to present, describe and conduct workshops about the ITI. These events will require the
CoST national secretariats to respond to these training requests. It will be necessary for them to be prepared to respond to
this need.
3.2.3 Impartiality while assisting stakeholders and procuring entities: all efforts to train stakeholders and procuring entities on
the ITI must remain impartial and objective. Since CoST national secretariats lead the evaluations, they will need to avoid
any situation that could lead to bias or perceived bias in their evaluations. It is vital to protect the credibility of the ITI
through guaranteeing impartiality.
Annex 5: Guide on lessons learned and
techniques for an ITI implementation
Infrastructure Transparency Index Manual
67
Annex 6: Glossary of key terms
An index is a number giving the magnitude of a physical property or other measured phenomenon in terms of a standard.
As result of the application of an index, there is a number or, a series of numbers, ranking the phenomenon that have been
measured.
Transparency is commonly understood as the characteristic of being easy to see through. As a social phenomenon, there is a
general consensus that transparency relates to the right to know and public access to information.
In its design, the ITI understands transparency in a broad and practical way, not only by looking at it as the traditional access
to information, but by also looking at the enablers and capacities that can enhance the access to information, as well as the
citizens participation that lead to the creation of public value with the access to information.
Infrastructure can be defined as the basic physical and organisational structures and facilities (e.g. buildings, roads, power
supplies) needed for the operation of a society or enterprise.
Therefore, an Infrastructure Transparency Index, in a simple definition, refers to metrics around the right of access to public
information on the infrastructure sector.
Procuring entities are understood by the ITI as the government organisations that manage and are accountable of specific
infrastructure projects, whether they manage the procurement processes of that project or not.
Infrastructure projects are understood by the ITI as the development of infrastructure assets in a specified location, generally
under the responsibility of a single procuring entity and budget authority and comprising all development stages, namely:
identification, preparation, implementation and completion.
Annex 6: Glossary of key terms
Facebook Twitter
www.infrastructuretransparency.org LinkedIn
